INTRODUCTION
Existence and the awareness of the existence constitute everything-that-is,
and nothing at all is possible outside of this. In their base they are one,
however, they get expressed as though they are separate, seemingly
engaged in a relationship, in such a way that the relation between the
consciousness and the existence both creates and enables a broad spectrum
of the remainder, the entire nature, and all the cosmos. The relationship
between the two is such that the entire nature, and all the cosmos exist as an
aspiration to bring into awareness the entire existence in all its aspects and
possibilities. Everything-that-is gets manifested as everything-that-can-be.
Our mind is only a factor that, like prism, breaks the unique light of
consciousness into the full spectrum of existence. Outside of our mind the
existence and the consciousness are one.
The relation between the consciousness and the existence is at the base of
everything, of all the phenomena, things and events, and this essence
reflects its nature the most obviously in a human being and through the very
human being. Consciousness and existence are differentiated the most in

man, and for this reason, they are best united in full awareness and
comprehension in the man. Therefore, one may draw the conclusion that the
essence of man is to be the foundation of this relation between
consciousness and existence, in order to implement and understand it, and
to bear the full brunt of this effort. Man's essence is determined by its
relation towards the existence, that is, towards the essence of the Being. [1]
Externally, this relationship is manifested as the progress of civilization,
culture and technology. Within the man this connection between existence
and consciousness is manifested most dominantly as the development of the
language and thought, and eventually as self-knowing, god-knowing or the
enlightenment.
Existence and consciousness are basically one and the same thing even
though they are manifested as the opposite, one as the existence and the
other as the awareness of the existence. Existence is conditioned by its own
causality, whilst the consciousness is unconditioned. Existence is simply
everything that exists in any way possible, and the consciousness is like the
space enabling the existence of everything. This way consciousness is
always above any form of existence and profoundly independent of
everything, transcendental. Owing to this transcendental essence the
consciousness enables the knowing of absolutely everything that exists. The
fact that the consciousness surpasses existence makes the objective
awareness of the existence possible. Consciousness is the very idea of
knowing, the transcendence to its fullest. Possibility for the transcendence
is the essence of consciousness.
Man is the link between the existence and the consciousness which enables
the existence. He is the connecting factor. All other beings have the
existence only, with more or less complexity, but it is always conditioned
with its limitations, the entire nature functions owing to the spontaneous
causality which does not need the awareness of itself. Only the man may
have the objective awareness of the existence in all its shapes and
possibilities, of the entire nature, and, therefore, the objective consciousness
of himself. The symbolism of the cross best depicts the relationship of the
existence and the consciousness. The horizontal line is the existence in
time, and the vertical one is surpassing or the transcendence of such
existence by means of vertical uplifting in the awareness and

comprehending, and the surpassing of time and causality. It is a cross every
man must carry in this world. In its essence, it is the differentiation of the
consciousness, or better yet, the true distinction of what consciousness
actually is. Finally, it can be said that the very differentiation of the
consciousness and the existence constitute the consciousness and the
existence.
The merging of consciousness and existence is nothing but
comprehending the very existence, the foundation for mind and creativity.
Every time we make something new, we connect the consciousness and
the existence. That is how all the spiritual and material culture came into
being, for civilization is the consequence of merging the consciousness
and the existence in man.
Our mind acts based on perception, and perception is there for the purpose
of finding out the true reality of things. We constantly attempt to crack open
the true reality with everything we perceive, with everything that takes
place around us, as well as within us. Finding out the facts of life is,
actually, the act of connecting the consciousness with the existence.
Actually, the idea here is that a man can have the objective awareness of
himself. It is lacking at birth. Man's development is predestined to uplift
itself to an ever higher level of consciousness of the existence in all aspects;
all the activities a man undertakes and all the experiences he goes through
present the full spectrum of the potential states that he can encounter
ranging from the sheer existence to the objective awareness of the
existence. Some people are closer to the existence and farther from the
consciousness, and for this reason they are more unconscious, while others
are closer to the consciousness and farther from the blinding conditioning
influence of the existence. Differences in the states of consciousness in
people, the ratio between consciousness and existence, are the source of all
the differences among people, all the dramatics of life, various characters
and bringing forth the dynamics of the development of civilization. The
more alert people are the more they are in harmony, understanding and
love; the more unconscious they are the more they are conditioned by the
natural causality, and undergoing the conflict with nature, the world and
people around them.

Since man's essence is determined by the attitude of his consciousness
towards the existence, man's essence is as transcendental as the essence of
the consciousness. If it were not like this, it would not be able to merge the
existence and the consciousness. Man connects and separates the existence
and the consciousness. For the mere fact of being above both he can
conceive both. He cannot have the experience of merging and unity of
consciousness and existence without the prior experience of their
separation. When a man is aware of not only the existence as such, and not
only of the consciousness of the existence as such, but of himself as the key
player that is the central figure in the relation between the consciousness
and existence, then such a man is fully enlightened or realized in his
transcendental essence.
One such teaching that best encapsulates the man's essence as previously
described is the teaching of sankhya. [2]
The only practice which based on the teaching of sankhya brings man to his
essence, which merges the consciousness and the existence, is the teaching
of Yoga Sutras. [3] The term for joining consciousness with the existence
here is samadhi . The Sanskrit word samadhi literally means joining
together or focus. Patanjali defined samadhi as the unity of the subject and
the object of perception, the consciousness of unity or the transcendental
consciousness, which surpasses the division into subject-object.
A completely realized unity of the consciousness and the existence in man
happens as samadhi.
We shall contribute here to this unity by describing it with all the details, as
it happens both internally and externally of the man himself.
THE NATURE OF EXISTENCE
T o put it bluntly, existence is everything that exists in any way possible.
The existence itself exists. Non-existence is not an option. Existence is
absolute. In its essence it is like the space which enables the existence of
everything else. Every form of existence must take place within the space

that makes it possible, while, at the same time, the space itself is
unconditioned by any form of existence. Therefore, it can be said that the
existence splits itself into the space which enables the existence of
everything that is shaped within the space. This division is, however,
ostensible. The nature of our perception forces us to view things in such a
manner. There is only space as the unconditioned wholeness, which keeps
shaping itself into distinct existence. Everything that exists in some distinct
form is the space itself that has shaped itself momentarily into that life
form.
Therefore, the nature of every form of existence, of all the beings, objects
and phenomena is the present moment, instantaneous, here and now, it all
exists only as the current shaping of the space into such a specific form.
Beings or objects do not exist on their own accord, as distinct and
independent (substantial) phenomena, but only as the momentary
modifications of the unconditioned wholeness or space.
Everything is momentary, it is all connected in unity and wholeness.
Quantum physics discovered at the beginning of the twentieth century that
our material reality is, in its essence, the field of pure energy. This energy
field was named the quantum field, or the universal field. It was discovered
that it exists and functions as the field in which everything we see in this
rough material world as being manifested already exists. Quantum field
stands as the hidden or implicit order in relation to this open or explicit
world we live in. [4] All the potentials due to manifest themselves in the
visible world in accordance with the circumstances are already there, like
some shape or phenomenon, and consequently, an event.
In accordance with this, the nature of reality is always one and the same,
but it exists dually: as hidden and shown; as unmanifested in its quantum
field of pure energy, and as manifested in some rough form, or in the form
of an event. This way, nothing is new in universe, it merely appears so in
our perception as something that is manifesting before our eyes and
originates from the quantum field of multiple possibilities. Everything that
has manifested itself was already present in its potential form. Nothing can
come out of nothing, unless it had already been there prior to our
intervention. Everything has its cause. The origin of all causes is the

universal quantum field. In antiquity, it was identified in esoteric
philosophy as ether or acasha in Sanskrit.
Acasha in translation means space.
That is why we have stated that only the existence exists and that non-
existence is not an option. Existence is absolute: we ourselves, every
thought, experience, every deed, every thing and every event in cosmos
have always existed and will always exist, more accurately, they exist
timelessly. They are all nothing but the modifications of space, and nothing
outside of this. Our life experience consists of singling out a detail from this
wholeness of existence in time and space. This singling out the detail is the
differentiation of consciousness of the existence that is, differential
ontology.
It has been experimentally proved that this subatomic world of the quantum
field acts irrelevant of time and space, that everything within it is
interconnected, that information of all subatomic particles gets transmitted
from one on to the other in an instant although they are (seemingly)
separate in space. In other words, in this quantum field, the rudimentary
field of the natural reality, everything is connected in one intricate whole.
Nature, at its most basic form, is one unique Whole, without any divisions.
In accordance with this it has been discovered that the nature of reality
corresponds to the holograph. This was the origin of the theory of the
holographic universe, which explains that everything in cosmos is
interconnected in a way similar to the holograph where every tiny bit
contains the image of the whole. [5]
This is of key importance for comprehending the consciousness for in the
final outcome it appears that consciousness is the base for the entire nature.
Every particle and every atom have an immediate communication with all
the other particles, and all the other atoms in the entire universe. The whole
nature is one big information system that communicates instantaneously
with all its seemingly divided parts. Aside from being a characteristic of the
most profound attachment, communication is the basic characteristic of
consciousness. Holographic unity of the universe enables its momentary
communication which is the characteristic of the consciousness. This is a

more complex illustration aimed at revealing the fact of how consciousness
is connected with the existence.
Our nervous system exists in this entirety as the mechanism which slows
down these instant communications of everything with everything, as the
filter which disables the momentary information movement of everything in
the nature trying to reach our perception. Our brain with the nervous system
serves only to slow down the functioning of nature below the speed of light,
and in linear time. Our nervous system does not create or convey
consciousness, but it slows the consciousness down to the recognizable
level in order for us to be able to communicate and live in this three-
dimensional physical reality, the way we exist now. If it were not so, we
would be lost in the entirety of nature, it would not be possible for us to
exist in this physical shape.
For the same reason, when brain functions or the nervous system are
disabled, we experience higher states of consciousness, higher dimensions,
and the physical world appears to us to be something we see as a dream
because we reside in it with the very limited consciousness. However, such
nervous system does not restrict us completely because our consciousness is
far bigger than our nervous system. If we reduced ourselves to utilizing the
nervous system only we would be hardened materialists and our perception
level would be that of the animals. This is not the case with all the people.
We can utilize far higher consciousness and alter our reality, our own and
that of our environment. Our consciousness is in its essence the same
consciousness that implements the very quantum field. Those higher
aptitudes of our consciousness some call the divine consciousness, or define
it as our link to God, some have called it ages ago the quantum mind or
thinking, the quantum consciousness. Here we shall refer to it as simply
consciousness or the consciousness of our soul, but we shall emphasize that
our soul is the individual expression of the divine consciousness that
enables everything, that enables the existence itself.
THE NATURE OF ENERGY

I f at base of everything is energy, then what is energy? The word itself
stems from the Greek word and means „a being in motion”. „En” is the
preposition which means „in”, and „ergon” is deed, hence energeia [6]
,
which means functioning in some work, in action. Therefore, energy is
work and creation in a certain form, only motion transforms a certain idea
into a concrete shape or phenomenon. In other words, this motion is a
vibration with which some idea can get manifested. The essence of any
motion and manifestation is vibration. Vibration is based on the
electromagnetic polarization.
Polarization which is at the base of everything, induces the movement of
everything, from the electron to the gravity. This movement is energy. This
is why energy always manifests itself through some functioning and
motion. Energy is vibration, and the most fundamental vibration of nature is
that of the vibrating of the quantum field. It consists of vibrations only. For
this reason, it is said that it is a field of pure energy, or the source of all
energy (the infinite energy of the zero point, dark matter). These vibrations
are also called the quantum fluctuation.
From the initial subtle differences in vibrations, meaning the quantum
fluctuation, according to the model of fractal geometry, gradually bigger
and more complex energy differences in vibrations take place, namely the
various vibratory-energetic structures and constructions. Furthermore, even
more complex forms come about that display themselves as particles on the
rough level, as clusters of particles and atoms, that attract or repel each
other all in accordance with the nature of their vibrations thus creating
bigger forms such as molecules, up until the moment when a group of
molecules forms what we recognize to be some physical form, some being,
a phenomenon or an event.
All things and all the phenomena come into being according to this model,
from the most subtle energy vibrations of the quantum field to the rough
physical world we perceive with our senses. For this reason we say that
everything is energy. When we stated that everything is only space shaping
itself into distinct forms, we said that everything is, actually, just acasha ,
the quantum field, that exists only as energy which shapes itself by means
of various frequencies expressing themselves into versatile phenomena.

Therefore, all the differences we perceive here, for example, between metal
and plastic, are basically just differences in the vibrations on the subatomic
level, the particles that make the metal vibrate in one way, and plastic in
another. That is all. There are no differences in the material because nothing
is material, everything is just energy that vibrates in a different way.
It is not all that can be said about the nature of energy. Its essence can be
explained in the following way.
If energy is as a being in action in its essence a quantum field which is
timeless, energy is everything that takes place in cosmos, and everything
that possibly could be, energy is the compressed action of everything, the
most subtle expression of that action, because it is the very nature of the
quantum field itself . Energy is in its quantum essence the potential
(information) of any kind of phenomenon none of which is possible without
energy. Energy of the quantum field and all the motion and action in
cosmos are one and the same thing, however, since it happens in different
proportions and dimensions, in the outside world all the energy appears to
be rough matter as events of the world, whilst in its most refind state the
quantum field, it remains as the pure energy potential (information).
Existence takes place out of time completely, there is no time in the essence
of existence. For this reason energy for all the actions can be manifested in
existence during the course of time, it can go back to itself, while it was still
the existence in the quantum field. The ultimate goal of existence, the
energy of the quantum field, can always reach every act of existence in
space and time. It does so invariably. The timeless quantum field keeps
expressing itself as the perpetual versatile existence in space and time. That
is why there is energy in existence everywhere and it is not separate from
the existence. This is made possible because the quantum field is
independent of the time process. In its rough expression energy is somewhat
restricted by its purpose and the form of action, but it always maintains its
original quantum nature, otherwise it would not be energy.
Energy is the finest form of action, the information for the action. The
starting quantum form of energy and the final outcome in the form of some
phenomenon are one and the same thing, because there is no time in the
essence of existence. In this manner existence grants itself the energy for

all the manifestations. Owing to the relativity of time there is no outside
source of energy for everything that takes place in cosmos.
IT IS NOT MATTER THAT
FLUCTUATES BUT INFORMATION
EVERYTHING IS MOMENTARY AND
NOTHING IS SUBSTANTIAL
I f at the very heart of energy is motion, in reality what is this motion? It is
information that moves. A wave is synchronized oscillating that in turn
stimulates another wave of oscillating. It is not some solid matter that gets
transferred by the wave, a particle through space, but merely information
that prods the next corresponding information. All the rough forms have
their origin in the subtle information. Like a wave on the ocean. It is not one
same wave that moves along the ocean surface, but water goes up and down
so it seems that only one wave is making all the commotion. This way
nothing is substantial, there is no matter that moves through time and space.
All such shapes are actually the current state of certain vibrations of space,
acasha , or the quantum field. Everything exists according to this principal
of momentariness.
That is way in which space can modify itself into any shape. We have
already stated that there are not any separate objects in space rather there is
space alone that in an instant can modify itself to any shape. It is clear now
that it was another way of saying that space, which is acasha or the
quantum field, with its vibrations gives energy and shape to every form of
existence which we, due to our own limiting perception of nature, detect as
a separate shape appearing in space. Furthermore, it is now even clearer to
us that every vibration is actually certain information.
Information is the essence of energy and shaping because the consciousness
is at the base of the modification of information.
Consciousness is at the foundation of everything.

THERE IS NOT A MULTITUDE OF
PARTICLES
EVERYTHING IS ONLY ONE, DIVINE
PARTICLE
I n order to comprehend the nature of existence it does not suffice to say
that it is at its base the energy of the quantum field, or that is as such
arranged according to the model of the holograph and that it is momentary.
It is imperative that we explain why the nature of existence is the way it is.
Only then will we be able to understand truly why the consciousness is the
foundation of all the existence.
Namely, consciousness is no different than the existence itself. Otherwise,
there would be no awareness of the existence, and no self-consciousness of
man. Therefore, the nature of existence cannot be separated from the very
nature of consciousness, or the consciousness of the existence itself, and
existence and the consciousness of the existence cannot be separated from
the self-consciousness of man.
Following the consciousness of the existence we shall use the most basic
logic in order to understand the concept of the very existence. Existence is
always something that exists as the foundation of everything that exists,
something which is perpetual and absolute. Everything that exists must
possess some wider grounds on which it resides, some cause; the widest
concept which enables everything into existence is the Absolute (or the
Being in the Platonic philosophy). His definition is completeness; nothing is
possible outside it, aside or without it. The state of being unconditioned as
well, Absolute is the freedom that enables everything else. Therefore, the
Absolute has divine properties. It also has the characteristic of space or the
one that enables the space itself within which everything that can exist
exists.
Although the Absolute has no individual traits, the quality of spaciousness
is the closest we can get in our effort to be able to conceive it. Therefore, let

us imagine the divine Absolute as empty space in which there is absolutely
nothing. As such it is unmanifested, unexpressed and unaware of its true
potential. This state is very close to the experience of non-existence.
However, non-existence is an impossibility by definition. This creates a
paradox in the very existence. If the divine Absolute remains unmanifested,
it will remain so in the form of nothing or the emptiness, but nothing or the
emptiness cannot exist. This paradox creates tension within the divine
Absolute and forces it to express itself into manifestation which, at the same
time, is the act of bringing itself into the stage of the full awareness of itself
and its full potential. Hence, the Absolute as the all-that-is, manifests itself
into everything-that-can-be. This is the fundamental principle of existence.
For this reason the divine Absolute manifested itself in the simplest way
possible, directly as its own opposition . No other option was possible. The
opposition to the sheer endless space in which there is absolutely nothing,
contrary to the void, is one single particle. We shall adequately name it here
„the divine particle” – with no religious associations. It was infinitely small
and with the infinite potential. It was such as the opposition to the infinitely
big and infinitely empty space. „The divine particle” we are dealing with
here is basically just the virtual opposition to the unconditioned void of the
divine Absolute; it is no different from the Absolute, it is only his
imagination with which he expresses himself and all his possibilities. It
possesses no mass and nothing can affect it. It is as unconditioned as the
divine Absolute itself.
A similar idea was concocted by the founder of the elementary logical
deduction in the three-dimensional physical reality, Euclid in his work
„Elements”. Euclid's geometry is not an ordinary mathematical system but
mathematically formulated Plato's philosophy of ideas. Euclid in
„Elements” defines a point as „that what has no parts”. It is actually the
occult Eleian definition of the Being that is the Absolute: according to that
definition the Being – Absolute is „that what has no parts”. This way one
point is geometrically the notion of eternity or the whole, the Absolute.
Point is a non-spacious entity, which is unimaginable for the space to have
no dimensions, and therefore, this definition of the point coincides with the
metaphysical notion of the Being or the divine Absolute.

The point is also the basis for orientation in space, the first phenomenon of
existence. This way, when the Absolute manifests itself through its
opposition, the point, the base for every objective existence emerges.
Likewise, this is that singular point which in the fancy of physicists existed
before the alleged „Big Bang”.
The scientists following their materialistic mind developed the theory that
this „divine particle” exploded into „The Big Bang” that later created the
entire cosmos, and all the elements, and that cosmos still keeps expanding
due to this explosion, and will therefore, in the long run, reach the point of
„The Big Crunch” when the full brunt of the explosion wears our. They
assume that this singular point created a multitude of subatomic particles, a
multitude of atoms and molecules and all the material universe which create
even more complex structures in their mutual reactions.
However, all the enlightened people, who see the reality of the nature as it
is, say one and the same thing: nothing outside the divine Absolute can
exist, only the Absolute is all that exists and manifests itself into everything
that can exist; its manifestation is actually the awareness of the existence,
and its consciousness is the same consciousness with which we are aware of
ourselves. In fact, what they say is that there is no multitude but only unity,
that God or the Absolute was never lost but is all the time the one that is
here and now, in everything, as everything-that-is.
What really happened with that point or „the god particle” if it did not
explode in the „Big Bang”?
Nothing happened to it, it is just important to understand its nature.
As a contrast to the Absolute itself, whilst at the same time being in the
Absolute, it has all the capacity within itself as the Absolute does. It can, as
the experiments with the subatomic particles have shown, reside in two or
more places simultaneously, to act as a particle or as the energy wave, and
all its shapes are interconnected in the non-local communication. In other
words: the creation is current and absolute, never linear. This „god's
particle” has such properties, and speed way bigger than the speed of light
(speed bigger than the speed of light has also been proved, but this evidence

is hidden from the public eye keeping us in the dark), that it can manifest
itself and act in several places simultaneously, in reality, it manifests itself
and acts in all possible places simultaneously .
And it does so continuously by currently, that is simultaneously,
manifesting itself in all the possible shapes, it cannot stand still because its
very purpose is to be the reflection of all the potential of the divine
Absolute. Since the Absolute cannot exist in time and space, its virtual
particle does not need time to manifest itself either, therefore it is not
conditioned by space. For this reason it is far quicker than the speed of
light, in short – it is instant.
Its instant appearing on many places at the same time to an insufficiently
aware observer, to a man with the slower consciousness, it looks as though
there were multiple particles, as though they created a myriad of various
atoms and elements, objects in space and time. It only seems to be this way
because its speed exceeds that of the speed of the mind, the perception of
the very light; its speed is instantaneous. This whole illusion of the
multitude of elements and objects the entire cosmos is filled with is created
by this single „god’s particle” due to its speed far bigger than the speed of
light, and its characteristic of reflecting like a mirror instantly all the
possibilities of the divine Absolute. The same way a painter paints many
paintings with all the colours and shapes with a single brush, the divine
Absolute does the same with only one particle, which is not a particle in the
real sense of the word, rather an instant reflection of the divine Absolute in
all its details and potential.
There is no multitude. It is the final truth behind all the stories of unity, of
everything being connected to One, and of everything being connected to
God. This background of the Buddhist teaching of the immediateness of
creation, the only objective teaching of the nature of reality in this world; it
is the foundation of advaita vedanta which speaks of non-existence of
duality in nature.
It is the basic reason why consciousness is ever present in the entire
existence, why all beings are the result of the conscious, intelligent design,
and not some evolution; it is possible only due to the momentariness of the
existence itself. If the existence were substantial, if time existed as linear,

the consciousness would require undertaking a very long journey and
burning a lot of fuel in the process. The current existence of everything as a
single particle explains how the consciousness and energy are inherent in
the existence itself.
PARALLEL REALITIES
S ince at the very essence of the existence there is no time and everything
takes place by the instant manifestation of the “divine particle” in the
holographic universe, and there is nothing new because everything that has
manifested itself in the existence already existed in the universal quantum
field as a possibility – reality is made up of all the potential realities that
exist parallel, here and now.
Every motion of the being is successively transforming space from one
current state to another, and not the movement of the being itself through
space. There are no beings that move through space, but the space ( acasha
, the quantum field) instantly and successively is shaping itself in such a
way, on this rough plain, where our senses perceive, that it seems that some
object is moving through space. Similar goes for the reality in which we
currently reside. All the realities already exist simultaneously or, better yet,
timelessly. With our state of consciousness, as the supreme attractor, we
induce a certain reality to manifest before us, more precisely, we reside in a
certain reality.
It was not outside of us and our reality, somewhere objectively far, it is
always here and now together with all the potential realities. With our state
of consciousness we have only activated one specific reality to domineer
over us and our environment. It will remain dominant for as long as our
state of our mind dictates it. With the change of the state of consciousness
we change our reality by simply shifting into another, that corresponds to
the new state of consciousness. The same way that objects that go through
space do not exist, the objective transformation of one same reality does not
exist, but the state of consciousness activates the transition from one
potential reality to another.

Any change of circumstances and material states is not an outer change,
nothing ever changes on the outside, life does not function that way. Only
one parallel reality is swapped for another. When our life changes we have
simply crossed over from one reality to another, from one frequency to
another, from one state to another, and we have not changed our life as if it
were an object prone to change. With our state of consciousness we have
crossed over from one of the possible simultaneously existing realities to
another, and to our mind tied to the body and senses this change appears
like an outer change in only one reality.
Therefore, if we wish to change something in our life, we should not
imagine that the desired reality is somewhere far away or in the future, and
that we have to attract it. It is already here, but we are not adjusted to it with
our consciousness, but with the reality which is present and we wish to be
rid of. Every experience, every thought, every object and every life we can
have is here and now (potentially present in the quantum field), but we do
not see it and we do not experience it, it is not our reality because we are
not in tune with its frequency. It will become visible and real for us only
when we change ourselves, our state of consciousness in accordance with a
certain reality. This way nothing comes from the outside, everything is here
and now, the only real factor is the conscious subject of the objective
events, we ourselves, and our state of consciousness. It determines and
activates the reality we live in.
Our state of consciousness, our every thought, always automatically aspires
to materialize itself. Thought is always connected with materialization
because the thought is merely a subtle frequency of some rough
phenomenon. Rough matter and thought, idea, are one and the same thing,
but in different dimensions. Thought is the finest, and physical form the
roughest expression of that same thing and reality. Thought is information
for shaping every phenomenon and thing. It should be clear to us why we
always attract the events that happen to us, every reality. We are not aware
of it so it seems that some outer force and the rough reality of the outside
world have imposed it on us.
For both the positive and the negative the same rule applies. We always
attract what we are in tune with. It happens automatically. It is not

necessary for us to deliberately try to attract some favourable reality,
because it is already here, we should merely permit the manifestation of it.
We shall allow this when we cease to hold on to all the negative states and
undesirable realities. The hardest obstacle is in releasing the negative states
and realities because they are based on the illusion of substantiality and
objective materiality, therefore in the reverse direction from the real state of
affairs: that everything is currently and unsubstantial, that the foundation of
everything is consciousness and energy, that the entire existence is based on
the divine consciousness which is no different from ourselves. It is also
logical that all the negativity is based on the opposition of the divine reality
which is positive.
The illusion that the world is material and objective, separate from us and
different from our essence is the basis for all the negative feelings and
states, and consequently the negative realities. It is enough for us that just
for a fraction of the moment we understand what has been said and get the
inspiration to change every negative state we live in into positive.
To sum up, it is not necessary for us to attract the good states, nor to repel
the negative, but only to allow for the good ones to express themselves
because we attract them anyhow with the very consciousness of our soul,
also the negative ones are released because they are not in accordance with
our own nature. The release in both cases is the only problem. It is a
problem of identification of the lower mind, energy investment in the lower
chakras , but more about that in the following text.
There is one more thing to be known about the parallel realities.
The essence of the parallel potential for all the possible realities is the
momentary nature of the quantum field. The finest energy vibrations
emanate from the field until they turn into the rough physical reality.
However, the rough physical reality in its quantum essence still remains just
a momentary vibration, therefore, there are no objects real per se. The
objects seem that way only because of the nature of our perception. Every
moment of a single vibration of the quantum field is one reality. Since there
is no time in the quantum field, all the realities are parallel.

Parallel realities have a wide range of transitional phases, from the quantum
field to the rough physical reality that we are able to perceive. However,
there are parallel realities that are invisible to our perception. The difference
between some of them is so subtle, one can hardly tell the difference, or we
may notice it later, upon inspection. Those can be mood swings or states of
consciousness we do not notice until something rough happens as the result.
Those are changes of reality within our mind, and it functions in pretty
much the same way, all the possible states of mind already exist parallel,
and we simply cross over from one to the other. They could also be subtle
changes in our environment. Some changes amongst them are faster, and
some are slower.
Some changes refer to the assorted dimensions, some to the world of ideas,
some the rough forms, and therefore their actualization is diverse. Some
changes of reality refer to one conscious subject, some to two, and some to
the multitude of subjects that interact with one another. Their actualization
depends on this. Some realities serve as the basis for the realization of the
other realities, for example some space is suitable for accommodating many
different realities. The house we live in, the city or the country may be far
wider concept of reality where many individual realities will take place.
Therefore, there are wider and narrower fields of reality, and the system of
subordination between them. Planet Earth is probably the widest foundation
of reality that carries many other realities on top of itself. That is why there
is coherence in space and time of the rough physical world we live in: for
the parallel realities to be able to shift into all their forms, from the finest to
the roughest.
In the creation of reality there is a collective effect, people create a certain
reality they live in together, to such a degree that it may be hard for an
individual to change it on their own. For some realities it takes the
collective work and effort, and for others individual one will suffice. It
depends on the nature of reality that is being changed. Realities exist in
many dimensions and proportions. For some realities it is enough to try
altering our way of thinking, for some a little hard work is necessary, for
some we have to try for years, and for some realities it is necessary that the
entire nations make revolutions and spill the rivers of blood, sweat and

tears. All these realities are mixed, from our morning mood to the centuries
old development of the human civilizations.
In the creation of the personal reality the topic of our research and the
karmic experiences in the current life have a significant leverage. We all
have the given subject and life programme in accordance with our karmic
maturity. We came into this world which means that we cannot choose our
realities in which we will live and experience life infinitely. The topic for
this lifetime was decided before birth, and generally dominates this life
experience, but not unconditionally, only to the point of being brought to
the state of awareness. Then experiences change and continue on a higher
level. The consciousness and the correct understanding always change the
reality. One same life reality keeps repeating itself and we remain locked
within just because we are unaware of what is happening to us, because we
refuse to accept the responsibility for it because we refuse to acknowledge
that it is there for the purpose of our personal growth and raised awareness;
because we blame others. In the holographic universe there are no “others”.
We are the conscious subject of everything that is happening.
Finally, parallel realities would not be what they are if there were no
options for a complete transition from one reality to the other with the
complete interruption of continuity. Still a transition of this kind for the
conscious subject is quite rare and actually needless, because for the nature
of the job every conscious subject has in this world is the continuity of
reality and all the changes necessary so as to keep the awareness of their
nature and the sense of what is happening. If some conscious subject would
leap from one reality into another he/she would be unable to complete the
task for which he/she exists. A partial crossing between very different
realities happens to us during sleep and the deep sleep with no dreams. A
complete crossing from one reality into another always happens
spontaneously to all of us after the death of the physical body. Such natural
crossing to a completely different reality is the only one that is justified.
Anything other than that would be abuse of position and conflict of interests
for the conscious subject in the process of growing in awareness of the
existence and the consciousness itself.
THE DIMENSIONS OF EXISTENCE

I n all the esoteric traditions the nature of reality gets described with the
elements of – earth, water, fire, air. Those elements symbolically represent
the dimensions of reality. The most thorough description is in Cabal where
these elements were detailed in the teaching of the tetragrammaton.
Tetragrammaton is a four letter word JHVH consisting of the Hebrew letters
Yod, Heh, Vav, Heh. The “name of god” Jehova derives from this for the
usage among common folk who were not aware of the fact (initiated in the
esoteric knowledge) that this formula, JHVH, represents the four-pole
principle of the universal creation of the world through the four elements:
earth, water, fire and air. It, at the same time, represents all the dimensions
of existence, the four dimensions of reality in accordance to which
everything in nature manifests and materializes, from the information to the
rough material shape.
In the biblical story it says that God created man in his image, which would
go to suggest that man is a microcosm, that there are all the cosmic laws
and principles compressed into something much smaller; that man is a
cosmos in miniature. It actually points to the holographic model of the
existence of everything in cosmos, where every tiny part contains the
pattern of the whole, that nothing is actually divided in nature.
There is one more element or principle on top of these which is called ether,
in the East it goes by the name of acasha , which means space. Ether
enables all the other elements, the same way space enables everything else
into existence. Therefore, the primary cause of the existence of everything
else, all the forms of existence is space. This primary cause was accurately
named acasha or space. Therefore, we have the following order in the
dimensions of reality:
Ether
Air
Fire
Water

Earth
Air, fire, water and earth symbolically represent the universal principles of
the processes of manifestation of everything. Ether or acasha is immaterial
and irreducible principle where their manifestation extends. Likewise, ether
also corresponds to the quantum field in physics.
Since man is a microcosm, different dimensions of the man's being can be
divided according to their elements in the following way:
The pure presence of the consciousness and awareness belong to the
element of ether ( acasha ).
The element of air which marks the inspiration with ideas, the
consciousness which is shaped and which shapes the ideas, thoughts,
mental patterns. It is the first way in which the consciousness is actualized.
The element of fire is the area of the mental activity, exchange of ideas, the
preparation and the input of energy into their realization, expressing will in
accordance with the mental patterns. The element of fire is brought about
when air and ether join, when the pure consciousness is actualized as an
idea or a thought. Together they cannot be expressed differently than the
force that powers the creation, as energy.
When ether, air and water join, in other words pure consciousness, idea and
driving force, an element of water is brought about and it symbolizes the
area where in imagination (astral) one suitable idea is selected from the
multitude of options and with emotional identification it is kept in one
steady, concrete and visible shape where the energy is focused, which in the
end is realized on the earth plain as the physical experience.
For example, car manufacturing is present in the element of air only as
pure fiction and as an idea of faster mobility; on the level of fire all the
possible models of transportation vehicles ever constructed are present; and
on the plain of water one specific and carefully designed shape (model) is
chosen, and consequently with the constant energy input coming from those
higher dimensions it gets realized on the earth plain by means of physical
work. Everything that exists in the physical world follows this process and

getting better acquainted with this enables man with a higher level of
creativity. Everything we create using our imagination and ideas (air and
fire) and experiencing it with our emotions in astral (water) materializes on
the earth.
It is of crucial importance that we comprehend one fact about the ether,
which corresponds with the quantum field, that it is at the foundation of
everything, or above everything, much like the space that enables
everything. In our being, the microcosm, it is at the same time our essential
consciousness with which we are always present in all the dimensions, with
which we can be aware of all dimensions, and this entire process of
materialization. If the consciousness were not above it, we would not be
able to become aware of it.
It is also important to understand that in ether or the quantum field
everything is already in its potential state, whilst the creation of everything
in the lower dimensions is merely the actualization of these potentials.
Everything is just in its warped (hidden, implicit) or its developed
(manifested, explicit) state of one and the same thing. Everything is so just
because there is only one divine particle, and this single divine
consciousness which acts in such a manner. There is no multitude.
As a result of all of this, it is imperative that we comprehend that our entire
power of creation lies in the power to act which comes from the finest
levels, the levels of pure consciousness of the quantum field or ether. The
more we act from the very source of consciousness while understanding the
entire process of the other dimensions, the more we shall be efficient.
MAN IS THE MICROCOSM
COMPRISED OF ALL THE
DIMENSIONS OF NATURE
D imensions of the divine consciousness in nature are the energy centres,
better known as chakras , in man.

The universe exists according to the holographic principle, everything is
reflected in everything, the holographic principle of the universe is not
chaotic, but follows the anthropic principle according to which the
fundamental constants of nature function the way they do in order to enable
the conscious subject into existence, more accurately the awareness of the
self in existence, which together with the divine consciousness expresses
the most distinctly in man. For this reason microcosm (man's being) is
comprised of all the dimensions of nature.
It was said that we as human beings were created “in the image of god”,
meaning as the microcosm because we are comprised of all the dimensions
of nature: from ether or the pure consciousness of the self; from the element
of air or the mental body and thoughts; from the element of fire which gives
us intent and will power; from the element of water which gives us
emotions and imagination; and from the element of earth or our physical
body.
This is why we can physically exist on earth, to feel (water), to have will
power (fire) and to think (air). The dimensions of the entire nature which
are comprised in our being as the microcosm make all of this possible for
us.
The pure consciousness of the self is from the acasha or ether, that is the
universal quantum field, and by means of the progressive multiplications of
the potential of the consciousness of the self, using the mind or the mental
body, the body of will and the emotional body shaped this physical body.
This is how we are able to have the physical body, the feelings, the will and
the mind. That is way the consciousness of the soul chose to manifest itself
in this world through us. That, at the same time, is the way we have come to
forget the consciousness of our soul.
Man's being is the tatragrammaton.
Through the man's being the universe creates itself and brings itself into
the state of awareness in all its dimensions.
All other beings exist in a limited way, they do not have all the dimensions
within themselves, they are restricted to only one dimension and the

specific manner of perception.
On the level of the element of air all the potentials for existence, that have
been timelessly compressed in ether or the quantum field, are expressed as
pure ideas, possibilities, they are expressed in us as thoughts. All the objects
are there as ideas. All the thoughts exist already, same as all the other
realities. No thought is ever new or ours. It simply takes place in us, but
because of the closeness to the consciousness of our soul the world of ideas
changes very quickly in our head and tests all its potentials.
We can merely combine the already existing thoughts and repeat some of
them so that, at one point, they begin to seem like our own. We never think
and we are never the creators of the thoughts. Thoughts exist in the form of
the world of ideas of the existence itself. This world of ideas in us tests in
the most apparent form all its potentials due to the proximity of the
consciousness of our soul which resides in our, human body. The
consciousness of the soul is the prime attractor of the events of nature
leading to its spiritual goal, as the meaning of all what is happening, as the
divine consciousness of the Absolute. For this reason this final sense can
only be realized in the man himself and through the very man.
Although the thoughts are never ours, and they are all already in existence,
we can restructure them in a new way, in the way which perfectuates the
meaning of actions. That is our task in this world. Thought already exists as
bricks with which we can build different houses, palaces or prisons. If we
only use the thoughts we fall under the causality of nature and we are
conditioned by it. To the degree we are capable of creating new ideas and
perfecting our reality, we are able to overcome the conditionality of
nature. This makes all the difference between man's slavery and his
freedom. We can have new ideas only with the better connection to the
consciousness of the soul while still residing in the human body. That is the
only way for us to be more aware of reality and we can find means to
implement this consciousness here.
In the element of fire the ideas get shaped into the form of energy, and they
are recognized as energy; it is expressed in us as the intention or will to
make a certain idea come true, so as not to remain sheer fiction; all the

objects exist in the form of energy, intention or the will to see some idea
through in the element of fire.
In the element of water the idea is united with intention and will and
receives concrete shapes in the world of imagination, in astral, which
corresponds with our emotional body. All the objects exist there in their
astral form, where we can concretely use our fancy and visualize them, with
all the details.
When all these preceding elements join together and add up, an object that
previously existed as an idea only, where the energy was invested in and
transformed into an astral shape, it materializes in the element of earth as a
concrete physical shape, some thing or an event. Then we can take it in our
hands and touch it.
All of these elements exist and act together. When we are aware of
something, when we see an object, a thought is formed in our mind which
automatically identifies it. We name it using our thoughts, we identify
everything we see. Later we do not repeat it but it goes without saying in
our system. We do this to every object we see for the first time, we identify
it with our thoughts, we think it through, we give it a name. We all do this
all the time, we always identify and explain everything, what it is and how
it should be done, from an infant innocently pointing in the direction of
something, to the scientist on the verge of discovery of some cosmological
truth.
All the phenomena and all the objects already exist simultaneously in the
world of ideas as well as on the physical plain, when, for example, we hold
a rock in our hand and in our mind we know it is a rock. Those are parallel
realities of one and the same phenomenon. This same object, thought-rock,
exists separately just because the nature of reality splits it into multiple
dimensions, it is layered and expressed through those dimensions. In the
element of air some object exists as the thought we have in us about that
object, while at the same time we have this object in our hand as the
physically materialized item. That is one and the same phenomenon where
only the difference in dimensions diverts them to an outer object and an
inner thought. The thought is within, the object is without.

The thought in us is just as real as the objects in the outside world. Only the
varying dimensions separate them so that they seem to differ.
To realize our ideas all we have to do is bring to awareness and harmonize
all the processes that we go through from idea to the materialization.
For this reason man is tetragrammaton, because all the dimensions of nature
unite in him, only the man has the consciousness that puts this entire
process of creation and materialization of everything together. At the same
time, and for the same reason, only man experiences the illusion of thinking
they are separate processes.
The divine consciousness of the Absolute enables everything in different
dimensions, from the highest and the finest, ether, down to the three
dimensional physical world represented with the element of earth. It is a
process that grows rougher and rougher with every step where the world of
ideas keeps being transformed into a concrete shape. That is a simultaneous
process happening instantly, what is a thought in the world of ideas or the
element of air, at the same time is a concrete shape of some being or
phenomena in the physical world, on earth. It is one and the same thing but
due to the nature of multidimensionality of the existence there is a
difference in the perception and that is the only real difference, seemingly it
looks like some process is happening during the course of time and in a
series of separate occasions. Our nervous system and sensory perception
were designed to slow down the current events of the entire existence to
such a degree where it would seem to be a gradual process happening
during the course of time.
Every form of motion is in reality one and the same motion, from the
changing thoughts to the movement of the body, but due to the various
dimensions it appears as an alternate movement, a separate phenomenon,
even seemingly unrelated. The one responsible for this separating but also
uniting is the human mind ( manas ). The same way a crystal prism refracts
one light into all the colors of the rainbow, the exact same way the
dimensions, a human body is made of, seemingly separate one and the same
phenomenon into the myriad of events and shapes.

The illusion of creation of the world as the multitude is just a consequence
of an individual consciousness moving through the various dimensions. In
fact, it is all just one acting within one, within itself, in the divine absolute
as its imagination. In the perfect knowing of the divine absolute nothing
moves, everything is just it itself, every shape and every movement is
merely the confirmation and the affirmation of itself. This affirmation of
itself is actually the consciousness.
THE NATURE OF CONSCIOUSNESS
W e have stated sufficiently about the nature on the consciousness while
speaking of the nature of existence. Perhaps, all that remains is for us to
stress the very essence of the nature of the consciousness.
Consciousness is the outcome of the entire existence. Consciousness is the
existence that has manifested or actualized all its possibilities, its fullest
potential, to itself, yet which is not unknown unto itself. Consciousness is
the existence that has reached its purpose, meaning or outcome, the
realization.
Existence happens outside the notion of time completely, time does not
exist because the existence in its finest quantum level, acasha , already
exists in its entirety. That is why the awareness of the existence may appear
at any time, it can go back to itself, while it still was the existence in the
process of awareness. The ultimate goal of the existence, the
consciousness, may reach every act of existence. It does so frequently, at
any given moment. That is the reason why we have the awareness of the
existence. It is possible because it surpasses the time process.
Consciousness in us is evidence that time does not exist in the essence of
existence. When the existence of the consciousness is in us, it is partially
limited by the illusion of time, but it always keeps its full potential,
otherwise it would not be the consciousness. That is why consciousness is
always linked to something good, nice and perfect.
Consciousness is the existence itself which is becoming aware of itself.
This becoming aware of itself always happens through man. In all other

shapes existence merely exists in any potential form. Only through the man
existence is able to reach the awareness of the self, because man is the only
one that is capable of transcending the time, realizing the very outcome of
the existence, and he is capable of this because he has soul which in the
long is the very outcome of existence.
Consequently, existence without the consciousness is not a possibility,
neither is consciousness possible without the existence.
The very fact that consciousness exists in the existence proves that
existence is timeless, that the outcome of any existence already exists in its
most subtle form, the quantum level. Since the nature of the quantum field
already possesses the potential of all the possible events in time and space,
of the entire existence, the consciousness is able to exist, it is able to be the
foundation of the entire existence. This foundation can be referred to as the
quantum field or the quantum consciousness.
The essence of the consciousness is in the surpassing of any possible form
of existence and its objective cognition. Therefore, consciousness is
transcendental in its essence. Transcendental means that what surpasses,
what is beyond. Consciousness is always above any form of existence for
we are able to be aware of every form of existence, every phenomenon. If
the consciousness were not able to do so we would not be aware of the
existence itself. Therefore, we can safely say that consciousness is the
outcome of the aspiration of the existence to get to know itself, its every
shape and all its possibilities.
The entire life is aiming at this aspiration. Every life form is a form of
aspiration for some of the life options to be expressed, for the consciousness
of the existence to be reached. Plants have consciousness, animals do too,
and man most of all. All life forms have been rewarded with more or less
awareness of the existence and this awareness does not differ greatly from
their existence. It is determined by the existence, in other words, they have
awareness of the object only. Solely man can have both the awareness of the
existence and the awareness of himself in the existence, the awareness of
the object and the subject alike. Only the man discovers the sense in the
existence, man can make sense of existence only by making sense of
himself. It is because man's essence is not different from the consciousness

which enables the very existence. Man's essence is transcendental in his
very existence, man's soul is not of this world, although the world in its
entirety exists as the projection of the consciousness of the soul, as its
intelligent design.
THE CONSCIOUSNESS OF THE SOUL
AND ITS INCARNATION INTO THE
BODY
THROUGH THE HIGHER MIND
T he divine Absolute as everything-that-is expresses itself as the
everything-that-can-be. It does so by means of the process of individuation.
The first individuation of the awareness of the Absolute itself is the monad
of consciousness known to us as the soul. Souls are monads of the
consciousness of the divine Absolute, its individual emanation or
manifesting.
These monads of the divine consciousness or souls create all the potential
life forms in order to be able to express all the potentials of the divine
Absolute. They create cosmos and all the life in it.
Every soul individualizes further so as to experience all the possibilities of
life in a finer and more accurate way. The final or the finishing
individuation of the awareness of the soul takes place in the shape of man's
being and life.
The principle is as follows: the divine Absolute cannot exist without
manifesting itself, then it would be abstract or nothing. It has to manifest as
the overall existence, as all the possibilities of existence. Any possible form
of existence, every phenomenon, event or thing is manifested by the
absolute itself. Getting to know every option is the awareness of the
existence. The divine Absolute projects itself into a multitude of individual
monads of consciousness that are meant to gather as many impressions of
all the life forms as possible and retrieve them to the divine Absolute as the

awareness of itself. It looks like it is circulating, although the only thing that
is timelessly happening is the Absolute itself, for nothing is possible outside
of it. It is all circulation within its sphere. Simultaneous and parallel.
Existence is like the mirror which reflects the image of the divine Absolute,
and its getting to know itself in the overall existence is pure consciousness.
This getting to know itself is timeless, which means that all of it has already
taken place, and keeps taking place at any given moment. That is why
consciousness is at the very essence of the existence itself and it is
independent of any life form. It is not a time process, time is a collective
illusion of our individual perception. However, we do not see that from the
perspective of the divine Absolute, but from our individual and very
restricted perspective which moves along the lines of linear time. Linear
time is needed in our perception to facilitate the chronological course of
actions together with all the details. Details would not be possible if there
were not linear time and the three dimensional space.
Therefore, the monads of the consciousness of the divine Absolute become
individual souls that get incarnated and begin to gather various impressions
while going through the drama of life and the consciousness of those
impressions they bring back to the divine Absolute as the awareness of the
very existence, as its awareness of itself. At the end of the reincarnation
cycle, once they have learnt the very meaning of the existence, souls go
back to its source, to what they actually are, to the divine Absolute,
although this is what they have been all along during the course of their
illusory existence, for nothing at all is possible outside the divine Absolute.
Everything is merely it itself. In the soul of man this knowing is manifested
in its strongest and purest way. It is the state of the samadhi .
The same divine consciousness manifests in the form of elements and
minerals, and experiences on this level all the possibilities of simple
shaping and the combination of elements. Afterwards, it manifests through
the plant life where, apart from an even more complex shaping, it gets
acquainted with the most rudimentary perception and it experiences the first
simplest movements. Then the divine consciousness gets manifested in the
animal form where it, with the enhanced ways of shaping, maximally
perfects the power of movement and sensory perception. All plant and

animal life forms are nothing but the ways of perfecting the movement and
perception. Animal life forms maximally perfect movement and sensory
perception through the food chain.
All animals are food for one another, some are hunters and predators and
some are prey; some have to develop the ability to move and perceive in
order to find food, and others to save themselves. In this practical way the
power to move and perceive the divine consciousness is developed in the
animal life forms. Finally, the human shape evolves that possesses all the
sensory and action organs, as well as possessing what animals do not, which
is the individual mind, so that man can utilize tools, and not just his body.
Man has speech and uses spoken words, all of which enable memorising
and safekeeping of information, their exchange and far quicker propensity
for collecting impressions from all the potentials of existence than all the
plant and animal life put together can do.
Unlike the lower forms of existence, which are limited to the survival only,
man has the drama of life, he has events and the odyssey of all the options
that surpass the sheer survival. Man has karma with which he collects the
impressions of the existence in the space of many incarnations through
assorted deeds. Through the karmic drama and the power to act man
experiences the meaning of all that is happening, the good and the evil, the
real and illusory, and by doing so he crystallizes the quality of the
consciousness of the very existence thus returning himself through himself
to its source, the divine Absolute.
Unlike minerals, plants and animals that have developed perception of all
the possible life forms, man is in possession of the mind with which he is
able to perceive, he can envisage things independently of time and space,
but also he has the perception of making sense of phenomena, work and
deeds. It is the most subtle area of the awareness of the existence. Karma
means work, act and deed, as well as the consequences of doing. Therefore,
karma means the awareness of the causes and the consequences of our
actions and events as such. Perception alone of the awareness of existing in
all life forms is not enough, but also things that can be done, and
consequently, what the outcome of all of that is, of every action and deed.
Man becomes aware of his actions and the consequences of his actions, and

in this way the meaning of every possible action and event returns to the
divine source as the awareness of itself. The final cognition of the meaning
of all the possible events in existence, the phenomenon itself, equals the
ultimate consciousness of the self of the divine Absolute.
Therefore, it can be said that the meaning of existence is in perception and
its improvement.
The soul does not get incarnated into the body in its entirety, a tiny piece of
it does so only. The consciousness of the soul branches out like a tree in
ever smaller pieces. Its strength is too huge for it to fit in any body whole. It
is not necessary either. In the body we can find merely the potential for the
consciousness of the soul which is enough for the life of that body and
collecting impressions, all the impressions of the existence. Gathering
impressions of all the potentials of existence enhances the presence of the
soul in the body. However, this process must come from the body itself,
when the awareness in it happens for the very first time, when it is separate
and estranged from the whole (to which it originally belongs). This tiny and
seemingly estranged consciousness in the body is the ego of man, his little I
or the physical mind. It is everyday consciousness of the mind that a normal
man uses whilst being in the awaken state in this world.
This little mind/ego, identified with the physical body, is the ultimate point
of the projection of the divine consciousness of itself, into something else,
into its opposition. The eclipse of the awareness of itself happens here.
Such a man is totally alienated from the source of the whole to which he
belongs. But nothing is possible outside the whole of the divine Absolute
and therefore, his condition is nothing but an illusion. This illusion of
separation from itself is at the same time the ultimate point of creativity of
the divine consciousness. To have an individual consciousness which is
convinced that it is separate from everything is the ultimate point of
creativity of everything that Is. It is the final stage of alienation from itself
needed for the divine consciousness to experience all that is opposite. From
this point onwards the only thing that can happen is the return to the
original divine consciousness, and that is what usually keeps happening to
man, he learns everything that can be learnt about the nature of reality and
how to go about it in it. Man builds his life and develops the civilization

just because he has experienced the most opposing point of himself, of his
divine essence. Every human civilization, and all the human aspirations are
based on a man's attempt to return to its divine essence.
This little awareness or I in the body cannot do much of its own accord, it
must receive help from the higher consciousness, some connection to the
soul. The link between the physical mind and the consciousness of the soul
is the higher I or the higher mind. It is not incarnated in the body of man but
it has a perpetual connection with it. The higher mind remains in the higher
dimension, between the elements of air and ether, and acts as a go between
connecting the physical mind with the objective awareness of the soul.
Owing to this connection the mind can have an objective awareness of itself
and every phenomenon. If it were not for that it would have only the
physical awareness of what it can perceive, much like the animals. Body
has intelligence of its own, very simple and conditioned, but sufficient for
the survival. Link to the higher mind and the consciousness of the soul
gives our body everything that makes us people and soulful human beings.
This connection can, however, be so feeble in certain individuals that they
barely differ from animals, their conduct is heartless and wrong. The
weaker the link between the mind and the consciousness of the soul, the
less that person sees the whole picture and the divine presence in any aspect
of life, the more he feels alienated in all aspects of his life, and therefore
negativity prevails in him, and for this reason he is in conflict with any
reality. He does not possess the objective awareness.
The stronger the connection of the physical mind is to the higher mind, and
the more the objective awareness is in him, the more this individual is
aware of its unity with the divine Absolute, the very existence is an
expression of the divine consciousness to him, he is always positive and
good because he is able to detect this consciousness as his own, and all life
as well. Namely, in the consciousness there can be no divisions. Only one
consciousness is in everything, from the divine Absolute to the tiniest grass
and particle, the same way this consciousness is in us.
The higher mind has a higher and a wider perspective, it sees from the
higher dimension every event in a much wider context, which gives it the
ability to pass on the information onto the lower, physical mind or Ego

which has a very limited perspective, it sees only what it is able to perceive
with its senses, that what is within reach. The information to the physical
mind arrives in the form of inspiration or intuition, a sudden insight, in an
awakened state or during sleep, when the physical mind is suppressed and
the higher mind can affect the man in an easier way.
The physical mind is tied to the body and the sensory perception. For this
reason when the consciousness leaves the body man begins to have much
wider and far-reaching perception, because he is in contact with the higher
dimensions and the higher mind. It is enough for the brain and the nervous
system, whose job is to slow down and limit the awareness, to falter a little
and cease to operate (due to some trauma or the drug induced state) for the
consciousness of the mind to leave its limitations and start to perceive some
of the higher dimension, some astral phenomenon, or for the man to find
himself in astral of his own will and experience the out-of-the-body state.
The out-of-the-body and astral experiences are the best example of
connecting to the higher mind, because the higher mind does not reside in
the body. When the consciousness is not limited by the influence of the
body it finds it easier to make a connection to the higher mind. People who
attain out-of-the-body or astral experiences easily have a stronger
attachment to the higher mind. A problem may arise in the fact that astral is
very near the physical world and therefore, impressions from the physical
world remain and begin to mix with the inspiration of the higher mind, so
that this bond on astral is not always perfect and pure. But with an
experience like that one can purify themselves better.
That is the basic structure of consciousness in the man's being: the
consciousness of the soul which only partially embodies itself and the
consciousness of the physical mind which connects with the consciousness
of the soul through the higher mind which is between the physical body
and the divine consciousness of the soul.

All the religious or mystical experiences of man are the reflection of
connecting the physical or empirical mind with the consciousness of the
soul using the higher mind.
All the man's growing in attaining the consciousness and the cognition, all
unity of consciousness and existence, is the increase in the presence of the
consciousness in the body. Although it can never fully embody itself it can,
however, increase its presence in the physical body to the point of turning
the body into the light. [7] Although its presence in the body is more visible
as goodness, kindness, love, mercy and enlightenment. [8]
The process of presence, growth and decline of the awareness in the body is
depicted with the chakra system. Chakras are psychoenergetic junctures
of consciousness and the existence in the being of man. Their diversity
reflects the versatility of states state of consciousness in man and his way of
existence.

The divine consciousness has shaped the entire cosmos through its
individual monads or souls, all the existence. In the memories of souls
before birth, [9] in the hypnotic regression, we find information that souls
created all the other life forms, the plant and animal species, before they
incarnated themselves into this body. At that stage they were practicing
creativity. They were doing so with the aid of the divine consciousness that
enables everything, for they, too, originated from the same source.
Likewise, from the hypnotic regressions we have true accounts that our soul
projected the current life and the body we live in. It is only a part of the
truth.
Actually, we as souls participated in the creation of the universe, the planet
Earth, the entire nature, and all the conditions this body lives in. It is
pointless to believe that we created this body and not all the conditions for
this body to live in, and it lives in the holographic universe in which
absolutely nothing is divided from the entirety of nature. The Earth we tread
on, the water we drink, the air we breathe we have created ourselves – of
course not us as this little lost ego of ours, mind identified with the body,
but we as souls, we as integrated parts of the divine consciousness that
enables everything.
Monads of the divine consciousness, the sources of our soul, primarily
created the cosmic space, followed by the creation of the stars and all the
celestial bodies and all the conditions necessary for the organic life. The
entire existence is the result of the intelligent design. The design of the
intelligence of our soul.
UNITY OF THE CONSCIOUSNESS
AND
EXISTENCE, OF BODY AND SOUL
W hen we speak of the unity of consciousness and existence it all refers to
the unity of body and soul.

On a global scale consciousness and existence create the whole universe,
and on individual level body and soul create the cosmos of events of one
individual being, man, the magic of phenomena otherwise known as karma
.
Karma and the very nature of events should be understood in the following
way.
Boundaries do not exist in nature, in reality; nothing is purely outward for
nature, the same way nothing is purely inward. Therefore, the boundaries of
our body, our skin, poses no boundaries. It is only an illusion of the physical
(empirical) mind/ego.
All the shapes and the phenomena in cosmos are in their essence the
electromagnetic phenomena. Such is the nature of the quantum field. Above
it, on a much rougher plain, existence keeps shaping itself into the atomic
and molecular form by means of chemical processes in accordance with the
laws of physics. However, at the base of everything is electromagnetism.
Cosmos is basically an electromagnetic phenomenon. The stars are a huge
electromagnetic phenomenon, gravity is electrostatic phenomenon on a
large scale. Planets are big electromagnets which by their sheer motion
(magnetic induction) generate the life energy as well as all the events –
because there are no boundaries. Life energy and events are one and the
same occurrence, only on a different proportion.
Earth together with the ionosphere is one big induction machine, the same
are all the celestial bodies which rotate. (Earth is zero, and ionosphere is
phase, and every meter farther up the ground the voltage increases by 100V ,
with their induction we get thunders and lightning, roughly about a hundred
of them each second).
In what way does the space constitute our body and character, events and all
our life? It does so by moving the largest objects that compose the space –
by moving the planets and the stars, because a larger whole composes a
smaller one. Everything that is about is composed of life energy, and life
energy on Earth is generated from the magnetic induction which originates
from the Moon and other celestial bodies orbiting around the Earth, as well
as the Earth orbiting the Sun. All of these have their origin in the overall

electromagnetic background, ether or acasha . Planets are magnetic bodies
and with their motion they generate life force and all the movement of the
living beings. Consequently, they generate all the phenomena, because there
are no boundaries in nature. Rules according to which planets bring about
events reveals to us the science of astrology.
However, the problem arises in our ability to conceive things. We admit to
the fact that our metabolism, what happens under our skin, is spontaneous
and conditioned by nature, but the same spontaneous and natural
conditionality we attribute to the macrocosmic phenomena. And everything
which is set between the micro and the macrocosm, our human endeavor,
we give a special status and attribute some “freedom” to it. It is nothing but
an illusion of the ego that is the physical or empirical mind.
The rotation of the Earth moves our body. If the Earth and everything in
cosmos stopped, our body would also stop and disintegrate into dust.
Without the motion taking place in cosmos we would be unable to move.
Therefore, the unawakened individuals never move of their own accord;
they are entirely made up and moved by a larger whole. Based on the exact
same principle of the way the Earth moves round the Sun, the wind and the
clouds, the same way all the living beings on Earth move, and we do, too.
The science which demonstrates how the wider concept, the planets,
generate all the phenomena, from our body and mind, character and
temperament, to all the outer manifestations in great detail, is the science of
astrology. Astrology is a completely empirical science based on the
principles that have only recently been discovered and called “the
holographic model of the universe”, “the strong anthropic principle” and
“electric cosmos”.
We have never breathed air, or produced a single heart beat, much like we
never did anything else in our life; it was all performed by nature while we
were imagining “I did it” or “that is my being”. Any notion of our
individuality and independent action is sheer fantasy. It is all One. Nothing
is our own. Everything belongs to the whole. Following this simple
principle every being in the universe can recognize the entire universe.

Our awareness of this unity of nature also means that our essence surpasses
it. We are the transcendental soul, and not the nature. Due to this fact we
can be aware of everything in nature. Therefore this lid of natural
conditionality is not entirely shut. In all this conditionality the
consciousness of the transcendental soul has found a way to sneak in. This
is the beginning of the story of man, the karma . The consciousness of the
soul brings forth the principle of freedom which liberates from karma and
the conditionality to the degree it is present in the existence, in the body and
all the actions. The consciousness of the soul attracts the events to their
meaning, to the awareness of the self. The nature was self-sufficient, the
jungle is full of life and nothing but that would exist in this world were it
not for the consciousness of the soul that found its way to implicate itself
further and further in the body. Everything that man made using his skill
and hands came about in this way.
The gradual descent of consciousness down into the body and its impact
through the body is best expressed in the psychoenergetic centres in the
man's body otherwise known as the chakras .
Man's deeds are a combination of the natural conditionality and conscious
freedom. The combination of all the planetary influences, which describes
the science of astrology, constitutes all the phenomena we are exposed to.
However, we are not always passive in this, it is not everything that
happens. We have come here as souls to introduce the principle of
awareness and meaning, the understanding of it all, and the very awareness
of it will bring freedom into actions. The more awareness and
understanding we bring into life and existence, the more we reduce the
conditionality of the nature.
The nature requests this of us, to make itself fully aware in the tiniest of
detail, and then it withdraws. This happens in the world and it happens in
the man, too, to each and every one of us. All the man’s karma consists of
an effort to consciously overcome the area of the unconscious and
conditioned. To a large extent we are mere witnesses in this world who only
occasionally act in accordance with their will. To increase the ratio of the
conscious actions using our own will takes several lives or incarnations.
When in the last life of the incarnation cycle we master the conscious

actions and our free will, we have set ourselves free, but at the same time
we have brought nature to the very purpose of its existence, to the full
understanding, not just as witnesses but through our actions, as well.
We are here to give purpose to all existence.
In order to understand the relationship between the natural conditionality
and will correctly one should remember the following definition: man has
free will only in his attempts towards the knowing and awareness, towards
the awakening, the strengthening of the presence of the consciousness in
the body. If he acts driven by any other urges or reasons he always acts
out of natural conditionality. The reason for this is that the consciousness
of the soul is the principle of freedom in nature. Therefore, only if he acts
out of the consciousness of the soul he can overcome the natural
conditionality. Any other deed of man is completely conditioned by the
natural causality, although he finds it hard to perceive it because
conditionality is so overwhelming and complex that man develops a
conviction that it does not exist, that he acts out of his own free will and
independently, or only occasionally he will admit to conditionality. The
reason for this is that conditionality traps the mind as well, mind being the
finest, informative activity of nature. Unconscious man possesses neither
will nor freedom. His will and freedom to act independently man can
receive only from the consciousness of his soul because his soul is
transcendental as regards the mind and the entire nature, independent and
always free.
Therefore, when we learn and work on ourselves for the sake of raising
awareness we act against the natural conditionality and we overcome it.
When man acts like this he radiates nobility, dignity and excellence. Such
conduct is a source of joy to man, maybe not immediate, but most definitely
permanent. All the creativity of man in this world derives from such
overcoming of the conditionality of nature. When we follow the natural
impulses without directing them toward awareness and learning, our actions
are that of a machine, completely conditioned by the wider context although
we keep deceiving ourselves that we act of our own free will driven by
some illusory, subjective reasons. The reason for this that our mind is just as
conditioned as our body. When man acts like this he is not different from

any other conditioned being that is a slave to the natural instincts. Without
the consciousness of the soul man is low and pathetic. Such actions are the
cause of all the suffering people experience in this world.
The bottom line is that man cannot influence the outer world before he
changes himself. By changing himself he changes the outside world in the
best possible way. In fact, he can only change himself for that is the only
freedom he has, on the outside everything is conditioned by the wider
context (by astrological and other rules). Therefore, we can have impact on
the outside world only indirectly, by means of changing ourselves. The
results are always visible: the more correctly we raise the level of our
awareness the more favorable our life is. And vice versa: all the pain and
suffering of life stems from man's unconsciousness.
The principle of relation of the consciousness and existence, of the nature
and spirit, was stated in antiquity in the text of the classical sankhya ,
Sankhya-karika by Ishvarakrishna; 57. “Just as insentient milk serves as
nourishment for the calf, so too does Nature ( prakrti ) act for the sake of
the Self’s emancipation (soul, purusha )”. 59. “Just as the dancer desists
from dancing having shown herself to spectators, so too does primal Nature
( prakrti ) desist having revealed itself to the Self (soul)”. 61. “Nothing, in
my view, is more gentle and gracious than Nature; once aware of having
been seen, Nature does not expose herself to the gaze of the Self (soul).”
All of this has been known in the Gnostic Gospels and particularly in the
Manichaean Studies (Hegemonius, Acta Archelai , 8. Bar Khoni, Scholia,
315, 22-27) that emphasize the astrological influence of the incarnation
cycles of the souls in the body: “When the Omnipotent God saw the way of
suffering of the soul in the body he called for the Paraclete. He, having
arrived, prepared everything required for the task of saving souls. He
constructed the wheel with twelve vessels. Put into motion by the celestial
spheres, this wheel captures the dying souls, and the raft is being embarked
with the dying souls, and then disembarked... into Aeons, where they
remain in the Pier of Glory called the Perfect Man... It is the pier of light,
because it is filled with purified souls”.
Therefore, if there is conditionality, there also is unconditionality this
conditionality resides on. The freedom of unconditionality is at the heart of

all phenomena, although they appear to be in the outer rougher world as
conditioned. Even though the world is conditioned, it is in a paradoxical
way constructed as the perfect means for expressing the unconditionality. In
other words, irrelevant of how conditioned it is, this world is perfectly set
for the enlightenment of man. There is nothing else or nothing better we
could do than to become enlightened. In fact, the very insight into
conditionality of the world sets us free. The very notion of “setting our soul
free” goes hand in hand with overcoming the non-freedom, overcoming
which can be achieved with the objective awareness only, with a clear
insight or realizing what conditionality really is.
All the conditionality of the world is set so that all the unconditioned divine
consciousness that makes everything possible can express itself. It does so
through man. If it were not so, the world would be nothing but a dark
dungeon with no life in sight, instead it is a vastness of creativity and
beauty. The beauty of the existence and the infinity of cosmos is a proof
that no matter what conditionality exists locally, the unconditioned divine
consciousness far overweighs it. This divine consciousness is the essence of
our soul.
Only two things are infinite and unconditioned; the cosmos and the human
soul. Both are in their essence one and the same unconditionality. The more
a man is spiritual, the more he is assured of this.
IF EVERYTHING IS A REFLECTION
OF THE DIVINE CONSCIOUSNESS,
WHY IS THERE EVIL IN THE
WORLD?
T he story of the nature of existence and consciousness would not be
complete if we did not give an answer to the obvious question: why is there
evil in the world if everything is a reflection of the divine consciousness?

We have stated that the divine Absolute manifests itself in the form of
monads of consciousness which further branch out to even finer shapes
known to us as souls. They are our essences. It is all manifested as an
aspiration of the divine Absolute to experience all its potentials, all the
aspects of its existence because the divine consciousness cannot live
without the manifestation of this kind. The divine consciousness is bound
to express itself as every possible form of existence and for this reason, the
nature of the overall existence is to express all the possibilities of existence.
Souls are the conscious subjects that gather all the experiences of existence
and bring them back to the divine Absolute as the awareness of itself.
Here we have a paradox. Souls as the emanation of the divine
consciousness are pure good, beautiful and perfect. People as the carriers of
souls in this world cannot possibly be negative and evil. They because of
their soul see the divine consciousness in the entire existence and recognize
it as their own consciousness, as the divine presence.
Such quality of their nature in this world causes two problems.
The first one is that because of the strong presence of the consciousness of
the soul within them and the consciousness of the omnipresent divine
consciousness such people seldom have interest in hard work and the
development of the material culture. They see that everything is already
perfect, that the existence itself rests on the divine consciousness and for
that reason such soulful people are naturally religious and nothing much
interests them apart from submitting themselves to the divine. Not even the
development of material culture and technology. All the saints and the
enlightened ones testify of this, those who have come to the point of
realizing the full consciousness of the soul in their body.
They can live in huts and caves. They are even proud of it. The lack of
material interests is considered to be proof of spirituality – which is merely
an indication of the immature and naive spirituality. The true spirituality
reckons on transcendence, on the overcoming of all divisions, the division
into material and spiritual included, because material as such does not exist,
and the spiritual can never cease to be because consciousness is at the
foundations of all the existence. The true spirituality is in the creative
manifesting of conscious into the existence, into the creativity that sees no

boundaries between consciousness and existence, which reveals existence
as the consciousness and the consciousness as the existence itself.
The second problem souls face is the task for the soul to experience all the
possible states of existing, the negative ones as well, all the opposites, even
the opposites of everything that is good and nice, the opposite of the very
divine presence. This is why the material world was made for. They cannot
experience that on their own accord. They need assistance in this, the
assistance of beings that do not possess the same awareness of the soul and
the divine presence and which, therefore, find it easy to commit evil acts,
i.e. the illusion of the opposite to the divine good. They due to their lack of
soul think there is nothing divine, that matter they are able to perceive with
their senses is everything and doing everything for the sake of survival is
perfectly justifiable, even hurting other beings.
For the monads of consciousness or souls to be forced to experience all
states of existence, even the most negative ones, the divine Absolute did not
only manifest itself into the good souls that are aware of their divine source,
but also into those monads that do not possess sufficient awareness of the
matter, into entities that have a far greater illusion of the separation away
from the divine source. Those negative entities were named satanic or
Luciferian in the folklore.
The divine Absolute has manifested itself in the proportion of two thirds of
the monads of consciousness who bear in themselves the awareness of their
divine source (the angel entities), and one third of monads whose entities
do not possess awareness to a sufficient degree (satanic, demonic and
Luciferian entities). This proportion was required because for the good to
win it takes twice as much power than that of the negative.
The destructive negative processes are always easier to do because they are
based on the illusion of separation from the divine source and the unity of
everything, which is strong in the lower dimensions, and the strongest in the
physical reality.
Negative entities are everywhere side by side with the positive. They play
the role of tempters that induce the coercion and pressure on the soul

bearers to experience what they themselves could not, the negative states or
the so-called “evil”.
Esoteric history tells us that the origin of the first human beings with the
divine soul as their essence, in this galaxy, was in the constellation of Lyra.
Gradually over time they have further and further descended down to this
material world in order to acquire experience of all the options of existence,
which made them lose the connection with their divine source more and
more. At that point they came into conflict with the negative entities whose
task was to force Lyrans to experience more possibilities the physical world
has to offer and the opposition to the existence, consequently as a result of
this conflict the descendants of Lyrans, human beings with the
consciousness of the soul, moved to many constellations, the Pleiades, Tau
Ceti, Eridanus, Procyon, Arcturus and many others.
In the many battles with negative entities that followed, and even conflict
against each other, they realized they were losing their connection to the
divine source, namely, that all the knowledge and technology they possess
they have their remembrance to the divine source to thank, to their past, but
the memory was fading fast.
For this reason they were forced to make one desperate move in the
evolution of the divine consciousness, a move that represents a turning
point back to the divine source. This final move, which, at the same time, is
the furthest point in the oblivion of the divine after which only a return may
follow back to the divine source, to the creation of man on planet Earth, and
in their image, naturally.
They put together all the chief characteristics of their genetics and created
man on Earth.
To make man’s development maximally dynamic for the purpose of
acquiring all the possible experiences, these three things were done.
Firstly, the human life span was reduced by a tenfold in order to speed up
human development in this world. From 800 down to 80 years.

Secondly, together with the Earth the whole solar system was made, as the
external factor of the psychodynamics in man and in the organic life on
Earth in general. On the influence on the psychodynamics of the man's life
we have had the science of astrology to shed the light on this matter for
centuries. Of the key part the planets of the solar system play on all the
organic life on Earth science will start conveying their finds to us in the
centuries to come.
Gnostics knew some of this and the beings who created the solar system
they called the Archonites, or principalities, the rulers. They considered
these as the negative ones because they imprison the human soul in the
body and they viewed this world as a sort of prison one must escape from.
They did not, however, know that in some writings one may only anticipate,
the solar system and the Earth were created by our own souls from a much
higher level than the one we are currently on, probably with the aid of
advanced beings. For such an undertaking qualified workforce was
required. It was impossible to perform with a magic wand only.
Thirdly, what was further done was the man's body was installed with the
system of the psychoenergetic centers, otherwise known as chakras , that
correlate with the functioning of the solar system. Those psychoenergetic
centers represent all the states of consciousness in man and the connection
with the state of consciousness with the way of existence. By means of
chakras the consciousness gets connected to the existence through man.
In such a way, owing to the chakra system, man cannot uplift his
consciousness without altering his actions and in accordance with this
uplifting, he cannot separate the consciousness from his actions. If he
tries to do so, he stunts his growth.
The essence of the creation of man on Earth was for the key and
“historical” reversal of the divine consciousness to be orchestrated in order
for it to return to itself, to its full knowing. It must be done by creating the
complete illusion of the oblivion of itself. This illusion of the fullest eclipse
of consciousness and existence takes place in the mind and the ego of the
modern day man on planet Earth, who thinks that the world is nothing but
material in the way he is able to perceive it using his senses. This is rock
bottom of the divine consciousness. It is the farthest point of alienation of

the consciousness and the existence. But, if we can envisage this process as
a form of circulation, which in fact it is, only from that point onwards, from
this most distant spot, the return to the divine consciousness appears to be
the only surviving option.
If the divine consciousness would constantly return to itself based on the
constant memory of itself, it would achieve nothing. An illusion of
complete separation of oneself and complete oblivion is required in order
for it to become fully aware of itself. This separation takes place in the
man's individuality, in the mind and the ego. In fact, in all of that only the
process of individuation of the divine consciousness is being finalized that
began with the first monads of the Absolute. The further process was
developing in the ever bigger individuation of consciousness in all possible
ways. The final individuation is the individuation of ego, being closed off
into one being and one body and the illusion of the complete separation of
this being from the whole, from the divine.
That was the starting point of man’s growth on this planet as though it was
the real start of man. Traces of previous civilizations on planet Earth were
wiped out, but not all of them, and the development of the new man began
from scratch. Man was made to learn everything from the beginning, to
learn the laws of nature and to develop science and technology on his own,
own civilization, and not just to inherit it from somebody as was previously
the case with the old human civilizations on other constellations. Because
of this the esoteric knowledge, magic, the knowing of the higher
dimensions, and the ancient knowledge of old civilizations were forbidden.
In order for the development to improve constantly, so that people with
human soul would be made to work on creating a civilization by means of
perfecting the material environment, the science and technology, and to
transform the nature towards the spirit and the divine consciousness, as the
only true continuation of the god’s act of creation, through man, the three
key events were provoked which triggered, maintained and speeded up such
a flow.
The first event is known in history as the resurrection of Christ. Jesus was
the descendant of the old civilization (“the son of man”) that used to exist in
the area of Mesopotamia, he was a great master of the old school esoteric

teaching, and he conveyed the true knowledge of unifying the
consciousness and existence in labor in this world. He also warned people
against the existence of non-human beings and the importance of the
awareness of the soul. We measure the time from the day he was born.
Before him, the old civilizations were measuring everything with the
natural, lunar cycles and it was circular, there was no civilizational
development. Since the birth of Christ the linear historical time was
introduced which is necessary for the development of science, technology
and the civilization in general. Hence, Christ is associated with solar
symbolism. Chinese and Indian civilizations had a huge potential for
growth, but they remained the same for thousands of years because they did
not have the impulse of expansion that Christianity brought forth.
The second key event on the scale of importance for constituting the
modern civilization was the founding of the Royal Society of London in
1660, and the publication of Isaac Newton’s book: “ Philosophiae Naturalis
Principia Mathematica” . This finally introduced the development of
science from the foundations, and it meant doing away with the mythical
and magical interpretation of the world. At the same time “the witch hunt”
began throughout the entire Christian world, which paved the way for
abolishing the pagan and magical world, with the esoteric manipulations of
consciousness and the higher dimensions instead of the systematical work
and knowledge accessible to all. Aside from the Euclid’s Elements ,
Newtonian mechanics represents the fundamental crystallization of the
human awareness in the physical world.
The third event is the birth of the Serbian scientist Nikola Tesla. He
completely surpassed the Newtonian mechanics and the limiting
materialistic view on the world with his research and the discovery of
limitless energy from ether. He finally found a way to bring light to planet
Earth and enhanced the development of science to such a degree that the
rulers of this world had to put a stop to it. At one point he realized the same,
that he was way ahead of his time, so he removed some of his patents, such
as the wireless power transfer (the Long Island tower) and the direct source
of energy from ether or the energy of “zero point” (electric car Pierce-
Arrow sedan, 1931). His research into ether and the limitless energy were

put aside in favor of the false theories that launched Einstein into the orbit
of popularity of the scientific world.
Tesla claimed that there are speeds far bigger than that of the speed of light
and that he had worked with them, which was in accordance with the
discoveries of the quantum physics, which would go to suggest that the
consciousness is at the foundation of nature which would have brought the
entire old viewpoints of social and religious traditions that still played the
key role to an end, and the human society on the whole was not yet ready
for all this. Consequently, Einstein was used to help launch the lie that no
speed over the speed of light was possible, together with the theory of
relativity with “the Big Bang” which should have played the part of the
modern parallel to the obsolete Biblical version of the creation of the world.
It was all concocted and forced upon the world and the scientific public,
through the Jesuits and Zionists, to diminish the significance of Tesla’s
work and hinder the scientific development in order for the people and the
society on the whole to have more time to prepare themselves for the more
gradual pace of development. Indeed, it was not possible for the mankind to
jump out of the ox cart stock and into the speed faster than the speed of
light, the way Tesla generously offered.
Proof that the work of Nikola Tesla was the final turning point of human
development on this planet, that man after the detailed knowing of the
material world actualizes the presence of the divine consciousness in this
world can be found in his own words: “The day science begins to study
non-physical phenomena (the deeds of the consciousness of the soul), it will
make more progress in one decade than in all the previous centuries of its
existence”.
In addition, it was imperative that the ancient knowledge of human soul and
its liberation be kept for the future and for those mature individuals who
always exist, and who are ready to free themselves of the illusions of this
world completely, that is the cycles of reincarnations, irrelevant of the
historical and sociological development. It was being done in the esoteric
schools of Gnostic Christianity and the original Buddhism. They are the
only ones who possess the complete unperturbed truth of the real nature of
human soul and its liberation.

Before Christ and the linear historical development of human civilization
on Earth, negative entities interbred with people and became their rulers. It
took place in Babylon circa 13.000 years ago. All the ruling bloodlines are
genetically related and their genetic uniqueness makes them appear
outwardly human, although their essence in non-human and used as the
portal through which the negative entities can have impact. They could not
show themselves for who they really were because people would recognize
them, and when they are recognized as such they cannot act the way they
are meant to. They disguised themselves as human by designing hybrid
humans, half human and half non-human, the organic portals suitable for
the task of being possessed and used for manipulation in this world. Astral
world is their natural habitat which makes it easy for them to influence
people who are aware of the physical world only.
Those hybrids were scarce in number, but they were put in charge of
people. Thus, this minority ruled over vast numbers of human beings with
ease. All today’s aristocracy and the ruling elite descends from these
hybrids. They moved from ancient Babylon to Rome and turned the
teaching of Jesus into the Christian church as the crucial factor for binding
the awareness of people with the matter and senses only, and work “by the
sweat of your brow” in this world, together with learning the basics of
knowledge and science. They orchestrate all coercion and pressure that are
necessary to break the inertia of consciousness of the soul in order for the
people to be made to work and develop in the physical world, the endeavor
which is the key to acquiring new experiences and possibilities of the divine
consciousness in this physical world. After the downfall of Rome they
moved to Venice, and from there to Holland and all the European courts,
then England, and finally the USA.
They are the source of all the negativity in this world, but the type of
negativity which is needed for the purpose of experiencing all the
possibilities of divine consciousness, all the oppositions, all the experiences
that human souls could never do unto themselves, they would never be able
to agree to or cause such inferior experience.
The symbols of all the rulers or Illuminati, that is their lower executors, the
masons, are all building tools, their god is “the grand architect of universe”,

they serve Lucifer because he is the consciousness bearer, the bringer of
consciousness in matter. Lucifer’s characteristic is that he brings light of
consciousness into such experiences which souls do not want to touch with
the ten foot pole because of their sublime and divine nature. This world is,
to a large degree, such an unfavorable place.
Man who has known his soul does not have ties or special interests
connected with this world, to him the physical world is nothing but an
illusion, he rather sees the presence of the divine consciousness in
everything. He sees that everything is perfect, that all the possible realities
co-exist in parallel. It is true, but such individuals may sit on the ground in
primitive cabins for centuries. They are not interested in the development of
civilization. However, only via complete civilizational development, from
the human rights and freedoms, from the scientific knowledge of the
quantum field, and its use in the sphere of science and technology, the
divine consciousness attains the consciousness of itself, of its essence and
the meaning of existence in everything, and all of this through the civilized
man. This is the reason why this type of coercion and struggle forced upon
people by non-humans and their hybrids is of crucial importance necessary
to overpower the dangerous inertia human souls possess when work in this
world is the issue.
Make no mistake: a civilized man is only the one who applies practically
the awareness of existence in the very existence. The divine consciousness
reaches the point of materialization through him. Through the civilized man
the divine consciousness expresses itself in the best possible way. Hence,
such a civilized man will be possible only in the distant future. By now, we
have had a start of a weak and primitive idea of him.
This is the plan for planet Earth, it was created as an elite school for the
complete development of awareness of the existence through man, from the
transformation of the material world to the awareness of the very nature of
matter. To put it more accurately: the Earth was created for the complete
merge of the divine consciousness and the existence, with all the details,
from start to finish, in the living experience through the being and the deed
of man. The development of technology and material culture is planned for
planet Earth and anyone who stands in the way of this will be stopped.

Naturally, there are people and civilizations that are not technology-
oriented, which are able to live on their awareness of the divine presence,
but they will not be allowed to rule this planet.
It should be emphasized that lack of interest of the young souls for the
technological progress was justified back in the day when there was none.
Life was much harder and people rightfully assumed that this existence
equaled prison and they wanted to get rid of it and return to their true,
higher state. Today, when technological progress is well under way, many
young souls are exhilarated with it and attracted to everything that is new,
“urban” and “progressive”. However, this interest in many young souls is
mostly immature, to a larger degree it is based on using the readily available
technological advantages rather than serious work dedicated to their
creation, which has always been the characteristic of very few individuals.
This is the chief reason why there are so many conflicts and evil in the
world. Evil and violence is bred on the individual plain and relationships
between people due to differing levels of consciousness, lack of
understanding, and the human need to experience absolutely anything worth
experiencing, mistakes included, not to say “sins”. Consciousness is based
on the freedom of experience, and this also means the freedom to make a
mistake. That is also one of the ways of reaching cognition. When the
awareness of soul is present in the body to a lesser degree such people are
called young souls, with insufficient maturity acquired from experience of
existence in this world.
Such people are on the path of learning the skill of how to work in the
physical world, but some of them are so immature that they do not have
enough intelligence to tell good from evil, right from wrong, and since they
are more identified with the body and its self-preservation instincts, they
find it easy to defend the needs with violence if necessary. Such immature
people are possessed easily by the negative astral entities, thus causing all
the hideous crimes and cases of extreme violence amongst people. They
later testify that in those moments they “did not feel themselves”, that they
were possessed, that they were unaware of their actions. With the growing
experience accumulated over multiple reincarnations, the consciousness of
the soul becomes an ever more present in the body, and together with it the

awareness of what is right and what is wrong. It is impossible for people to
know what is right and good without the awareness of the soul.
On a global scale similar principles breed similar civilizational conflicts.
The same way the negative astral entities affect immature people and force
them to commit individual crimes, following the same line of events, the
hybrid people and negative entities, Illuminati and aristocracy, force entire
nations into wars and all-out destruction, when a need arises for some
change and collective progress to take place. One should never forget that
wars instigated the economic and scientific growth to the maximum. Maybe
this is down to the very inertia of the material world we live in, due to the
principle of dialectics, the unity of opposites that rules it, which inspires
people to show their finest virtue when their life is at the all time low, too
often the good causes must be achieved through despicable means.
One good example of this would be the economics. Neither today, not in the
near future with this type of civilizational growth a fair and just economic
and financial order is not likely to happen. The exploitation must exist still,
there are too many factors that are out of control, young and immature souls
make the highest percentage of population on this planet, if free energy
were accessible, they would spend it lavishly on their lower impulses which
would lead to further decay. The same would happen with the just and
interest free financial policy.
The economic growth would considerably slow down and maybe even stop.
There is inevitability in the fact that the financial order which produces
results can only be about for a certain period of time, after which a crisis
must be generated which results in a crash which in turn produces sufficient
momentum for the new swing of an economic cycle which will give power
to the economic growth, albeit for a short time. Those are all external
coercions necessary for people with young and immature souls, with
insufficient awareness of the soul within themselves. Should they be
provided with all the means necessary for free and unlimited use, this would
merely fuel their lower urges, and make them want to lash out and fulfill
their immature aspirations. The lack of consciousness, maturity and inner
balance is best expressed in the lack of balance and conscious commodity
in the outward environment, in the living conditions.

Illuminati and the aristocrats, the owners of all the corporations, use various
means to put additional pressure on people wherever they can. They poison
people through food, medications and vaccines to make people aware of
these dangers, to make them want to turn health conscious; they twist truth
and use media and educational institutions, which they are exclusive owners
of, to make them the centers of lies and deceit to make people want to reach
out for the truth, and find ways of safeguarding it against the unscrupulous
lot. They make them want to attain the real scientific knowledge after
testing all the variables and debunking the falseness. In short, their pressure
with the all the negativity only crystallizes the awareness of what is positive
in man.
Basically they simply provoke the opposites and make people get to know
the world they live in step by step. That is all they do. This is the world
where the opposites rule and that is the way to make the presence of
consciousness stronger. Every man once he has become aware of his wrong
doing and asked for repentance becomes a better man, more alert of the
world around him and his role in the whole affair. The same thing happens
on the global scale with mankind. One learns on their mistakes. Apart from
the obvious discrepancies, somewhere at the back of such a law is the need
of the divine consciousness to experience everything that can be
experienced. This “everything” should be taken quite seriously. It is not an
option for an individual to simply accept a truth from some authority and
blindly submit to it and follow. Man must reach the truth on his own, to
make awareness of the truth his awareness and to make the truth his deed.
That is the only way to make the consciousness of his soul express the
divine consciousness in this world.
Gnostics were the first to point to the fact that Archonites are unable to
create, they are merely able to modify what has already been created, to
make simulations (Gnostics called the simulations and simulacrums of
Archonites “bad copies”, the way we would call them virtual reality or the
matrix of illusion today). It only means that Illuminati and all the negative
forces offer options that people choose to realize. No negative force is
going to grab a guy and throw him into the air off a building or a bridge to
his imminent death. It can only lead a man to do it. This is the modus
operandi of Illuminati. They cause the opposing effect, they lead on, open

the door for evil and negativity, and people choose to go through that door,
they commit evil for the lack of knowing while being unconscious of the
consequences. This way people are made aware to what a point they are
actually unconscious, they only realize, and materialize the man's
unconsciousness and ignorance. Thus, they help man attain a higher level
of awareness. Indeed, throughout the entire history people have never
before been so aware of this conspiracy than today when it is the biggest,
when the coercion and the pressure of lies and destruction are the biggest.
Global conflicts are mostly based on the opposition of two aspirations. The
first is the tendency of the soulful people to remain inert, not to do much in
the civilizational sense and the transformation of the material world, and to
go back to their divine source, to God and Kingdom come. They rightly feel
that the process of materialization is an alien concept to a human soul, but
they cannot comprehend that the human souls did not arrive to this world
just for the sake of discomfort, but to go through it and transform it in
accordance with the divine consciousness they themselves represent, in
order to gather all the experiences of existence and take them back to the
divine as the awareness of itself. Such immature aspirations of the return to
the divine are present in the ethical religions like: Judaism, Islam and the
Orthodox. Likewise, in the old polytheistic and shamanic traditions there is
a tendency towards the unity with nature, and through it the unity with the
divine. Creative work is completely absent.
The second aspiration is in favor of building the material culture as the
foundation which would enable the perfecting of consciousness in matter
and use it as the means to the divine consciousness. Such aspiration exists
because the consciousness is unable to express itself in a different way in
the physical world other than through labor and the transformation of this
world. Consciousness possesses the quality of action as well as creation,
nothing that exists can be static. In order to gain command of the physical
world it must transform this world and make people’s lifestyle and the
transfer of information between them more efficient so as to be able to act
in such a world without impedance. The development of technology and the
order of civilization is nothing but what is already present in the quantum
field of existence in which everything is perfect, in which all the
possibilities co-exist as parallel realities, in which everything is

interconnected by the instant information transfer which permits for the
accessibility of the consciousness.
The identical thing is expressed here on a large scale as improving the
conditions of life and possibilities of transport, the accessibility of
information via the Internet and the mobile broadband. Technological and
civilizational improvement is nothing but manifesting all the potentials that
already exist in the quantum field. Polity that enables human rights and
freedoms is none other than the rule of consciousness among people. Those
are ways in which the divine consciousness gets expressed as sheer
existence. This is a spontaneous tendency to turn the potential into concrete,
to make implicit (quantum) order into explicit. This tendency many call
“New World Order” at the forefront of which are Illuminati with their
masons, regrettably they stop at nothing and do not choose their means in
achieving the goal, so their overall performance is no better than of those
who do nothing at all.
There is currently an on-going conflict between the two. The former put
spikes in the wheels of the civilizational progress and pull backwards, to the
return to heaven, they would cooly leave all the land unfarmed, while the
latter pull forward wishing to make paradise on Earth at all costs,
downtrodden anything they come across. Thus, causing even more havoc
on planet Earth. Only owing to the Earth’s superior strength and
consciousness life goes on, civilization is making baby steps, however all of
it is going at a dubiously slow pace.
Life goes on despite the conflicts and chaos all over the globe, people get
ahead in their civilizational progress, maybe for the simple reason that the
consciousness of the soul can never die, it is the sole condition for life.
However young or immature it may seem, to people it always conveys the
awareness of its true purpose in this world, no matter how lost it may seem
at one point it always finds strength to regain it somehow. The Earth with
its beauty provides additional support.
The ethical religions, Judaism and Islam, hinder freedom necessary for the
consciousness to get expressed in all possible ways, they command people
everything they must do thus depriving them of their free will and the
personal awareness of the proper action. They represent the dictatorship of

one-mindedness. Although as such they were needed to the young mankind
in order to cultivate its behavior in some way, by the external coercion of a
religious authority, in time they become a burden and restrict the growth in
consciousness and the implementing of the free will of mankind.
The problem is that neither of them are much aware of their nature and the
motivation for doing what they are doing. Neither are familiar with samadhi
, the notion that it is necessary for the divine consciousness and existence to
merge in the heart of man firstly, and only then will their unity be able to
express itself in the world. The more samadhi takes place in man, the more
Kingdom come will be on earth, and God’s will be done.
Maybe this book gives them a helping hand they desperately need to meet
half way, for there can be no true civilization without the consciousness of
the soul, nor can the consciousness of the soul express itself without the
true civilization.
***
This was an illustration of how the divine consciousness expresses itself
through nature, human society and global development.
Now we shall see how the consciousness and existence bind together and
get expressed through the man himself.
THE LAW OF NUMBER SEVEN
AND THE SEVEN CHAKRAS
A t the beginning we saw that divine consciousness gets expressed as the
full spectrum of overall existence. In other words, everything-that-is is
always expressed as everything-that-is-possible. The divine consciousness
of the Absolute expresses itself in such a manner that it becomes everything
that in any way, shape or form can be.
This spectrum may quite appropriately be compared with the spectrum of
colors of the sunlight. It breaks up into seven colors through the prism.

Sunlight consists of seven colors because the light of divine consciousness
is always expressed through the law of number seven, or the seven phases.
The principle of seven phases of manifestation is present in everything, not
just in light, it is in the sound, hence, the seven notes, and in the process of
forming the crystal as well as the realization of many other material
processes and events. Nothing is realized following one straight line, every
process of realization has its rhythms, oscillations, changes, set backs,
additional impulses, and when we take a careful look we can see that there
always are seven of them. The law of number seven is at the foundation of
creation. Hence, the Biblical story of the creation of the world in seven
days. It is a metaphor which expresses the law of number seven.
Man is a microcosm, his body is the holographic image of the cosmos in
miniature. All the dimensions the cosmos consists of (earth, water, fire, air
and ether) are comprised in the man's being which gives him the body
(earth), feelings and imagination (water), energy and will (fire), thoughts or
information (air) and the consciousness itself (ether, the quantum field).
Man is therefore, able to comprehend all the dimensions of the phenomena
of nature and to move through all the dimensions. Actually, his
“movement” through them is nothing but expanding his focus away from
the physical field and on to the higher and wider dimensions. He possesses
all of that as his own being. Therefore, “out-of-body” experience and being
in higher dimensions is no exit, it is only the expansion of the alertness and
consciousness.
The law of number seven, by which the divine consciousness of the
Absolute expresses itself as the most general existence, is reflected in man
as the microcosm of the overall existence. It is maintained as the system of
the psychoenergetic centers otherwise known as chakras .

Chakras are whirls of energy in the form of torus which connect
consciousness with existence, through them the consciousness is expressed
as existence. The word chakra means whirl or wheel.
Chakras have their colors which are in accordance with the basic colors of
the spectrum of sunlight. Chakras are also on the exact location of the
glands in the human body, which determine all the hormonal functions as
well as functioning of all the vital organs. The glands function under the
influence of information body receives from the outside and the inside,
mainly via light frequencies, that is colors. DNA molecule is basically a
code of light. DNA receives crucial information on how to function from
photons, the codes of light of sunlight. Every color of the spectrum of
sunlight plays the key role in the functioning of a certain vital organ. That is
why there is the healing with colors, and the healing with sun. Pituitary
gland is the most important for the functioning of all the remaining glands.
The ultraviolet spectrum of sunlight is the key for the functioning of the
pituitary gland. Hence, receiving sunlight and colors plays the most
important part in maintain good health. Body receives sunlight through the
eyes the most. The sunlight, the colors, chakras and the functioning of the
vital organs interconnect in one union which gives life.

Every chakra reflects one phase in the process of materialization, from the
pure consciousness, ether or the quantum field, from the idea, to the
concrete physical realization, the rough material world.
With its seven chakras the man’s being is a prism which distinguishes the
divine consciousness from the existence, and by doing so it joins them, and
reveals their original unity.
The fact that the consciousness unites with existence through chakras
reveals the reason why every state of consciousness in man gets expressed
through a correlating event or man’s conduct. Because of chakras man
cannot divide his consciousness from its realization in the existence, every
state of consciousness is expressed as behavior of some kind, more
accurately, that is the dominant effect of a certain chakra , its energetic
influence. And vice versa. Every type of behavior and way of life affect the
dominance of a certain chakra . Not only do chakras affect behavior, but
behavior also affects the chakras . It is used in yoga practice, by doing
certain exercises and behavioral patterns the energy and consciousness are
directed to certain chakras and certain aspects of the man's existence are
activated.
In such a manner chakras represent ways of existence, the dominant role of
a certain chakra reflects itself in the way we currently exist, what we do and
how we perceive reality.
Since the meaning of all the existence is in perception, the divine Absolute
experiences the awareness of itself through the existence of cosmos, every
individual being is only an individual form through which the divine
consciousness actualizes the awareness of itself. Likewise, every chakra in
man, as the microcosm, reflects the full spectrum of the possible states of
consciousness man is capable of existing with, the full spectrum of
perception of the divine consciousness in man and through man. From the
most exalted divine state to the lowest animal one, from the complete
freedom to the complete conditionality. From the full remembrance of
itself, its essence or the consciousness of the soul, to the utter oblivion of
itself, its essence and the consciousness of the soul.

Namely, the system of chakras represents nothing but the spectrum of the
presence of the consciousness of the soul in the body.
In the overall existence of man the issue is none other than the spectrum of
the presence of the consciousness of the soul in the body.
The consciousness of the soul is actually the divine consciousness which is
expressed as the existence itself, as our body.
When the consciousness is expressed in the most rudimentary form in the
physical body, it is expressed through the first, the lowest chakra,
muladhara . Once its unity with the existence starts to get more complex, it
is expressed through the higher and higher chakra . When the
consciousness has gathered all the experience of existence to the point it is
able to reach awareness of itself in the very existence, or when all the
experience of existence crystallizes into the awareness of itself, then the
divine consciousness of the soul in the human being is expressed through
the highest chakra , sahasrara .
The highest chakra, sahasrara , is the peak the consciousness of the soul
which can be expressed in the human body. All the chakras are ties of the
body with soul, however progressively less pure, whilst the highest chakra
sahasrara is the purest bond of body with the soul.
THE DIVISION OF CHAKRAS INTO
THREE SECTIONS
Man’s being has three centers:
1. Intellectual center which determines perception, understanding and
expression;
1. Motoric and instinctive center which determines the movement of
the body, all autonomous functions and unconscious urges; and

2. Emotional center which is half way between these two and unifies
their functioning.
Generally speaking, these three centers represent the merging (3) of the
heavenly (1) and the earthly (2) principle in man. Intellectual center
represents the principle of freedom and knowing, the motoric one
everything that conditions and limits us, and the emotional represents the
way of unifying, understanding and creative surpassing of these opposites.
All these centers work together, but they are not harmonized when they are
not fully realized, so each one can outweigh the others.
They blend together. For example, someone may think and feel
mechanically, as a force of habit after being conditioned (intellectual center
may function mechanically when we think formatively), however the bigger
freedom of choice which the higher centers possess, the intellectual and the
emotional one, may help understand and overcome the habits and
mechanical behavior of the body and mind.

The emotional center is the most important in unifying the proper
functioning of all centers and chakras . It is independent of the body and
mind and for this reason it is able to connect and harmonize them. The
emotional center is between the intellectual and the motoric.
All the chakras according to this division can be divided into three parts, or
better yet into two groups, the lower and the upper, and one chakra in
between ( anahata ) that joins them.
The first three chakras, muladhara, svadhistana and manipura comprise a
group that represents the motoric center, the mechanical conduct and
functioning, the lower being of man, the lower consciousness conditioned
by the body and bodily life. They are our link to nature, our ability to
survive biologically and in a society. Those are the centers that people use
naturally and spontaneously.
The upper three chakras , vishuddhi, ajna and sahasrara , comprise the
intellectual center through which the consciousness conducts
understanding, perception and expression. They are our link to the higher
mind and the divine consciousness of the soul. In order for their functioning
to overpower the lower, instinctive center, higher awareness is needed
which can be acquired with karmic maturity and by working on oneself. It
is necessary to harmonize the functioning of the lower centers for the
consciousness to be able to have use from the higher ones. For harmonizing
the functioning of the lower centers, it is necessary to conduct
consciousness from the higher ones.
The central chakra, anahata , is located in the area of the heart and it plays
the key role in connecting these two groups or centers, in conducting the
consciousness from the higher to the lower centers. Emotional center is of
crucial importance in merging the divine consciousness and existence. The
stronger the awareness in the centre is, the more emotionally mature we are,
in other words, the more aware we are of the true nature of everything as
the unconditional divine love which makes everything possible, the more
proper the functioning of the remaining chakras is, and all the remaining
states of consciousness on all the remaining levels.

Therefore, only with the emotional maturity we can judge properly, intellect
is not enough, its role is neutral and more directed towards perception. We
can make decisions using the motoric center, but they will be aimed at the
momentary needs of survival. Only emotional maturity can override these
two functions and see everything right. Emotional maturity manifests in us
first and foremost as the unconditional love. Love is the awareness which is
above all opposites, above all limitations and only such awareness can unite
what cannot be united. It can do so because it is the closest the divine
consciousness which is the source of the unconditional love which makes
everything possible.
In order for the divine consciousness to be able to manifest completely in
our being, all it is required is for all the chakras to do their task properly
and not to block the flow of energy and consciousness with erroneous
functioning. To work properly all they should be is properly aligned and
harmonized. This correctness can be achieved only with the correct
understanding of the nature of the existence, knowing that it is a reflection
of the divine consciousness in the form of unconditional love which makes
everything possible.
Divine consciousness cannot be known otherwise in this world other than in
the form of unconditional love in everything, in the very existence. That is
why the key center which unifies everything else is situated in the man's
heart, in the anahata chakra .
Love is the ability to connect things we are unable to connect or understand
with our body or mind. Love connects what cannot be connected,
comprehends the incomprehensible, it sees the invisible. For this reason the
key chakra is not at the top, but in the center of the man's being, in his
heart.
It is also important to know that every chakra has its division into the
higher, conscious part, and the lower unconscious and mechanical part. The
lower part of every chakra functions motorically or mechanically for the
sake of the survival, because the functioning of every chakra is necessary
for the entire being. They can, therefore, function with the minimum of
awareness, only mechanically and this is when they show their lowest
characteristics. In order for the consciousness and energy to uplift, and with

it the quality of man's being, it is necessary to strengthen the functioning of
the conscious part of every chakra . The chakra's awakening is by the
awakening of the nature of every way of existence and action represented
by a certain chakra . It is done by making its unaware part more aware. The
nature of the consciousness is such that one needs to put conscious effort
into making it work. Only the unconscious is capable of working of its own
accord, the way nature does. The consciousness strengthens and uplifts
itself only through consciousness, the effort nature does not provide, it is a
creative endeavor which can only be achieved on the previous experience of
consciousness. This endeavor does not exist anywhere in nature but only in
such individuals who make a conscious effort to reach the consciousness.
THE HERTZIAN AND NON-
HERTZIAN
FREQUENCIES OF CHAKRAS
W e have previously stated that all the dimensions of existence originate
from ether, or the quantum field. Immediately beyond ether is the
dimension of air which represents the world of ideas or thoughts in man.
This is the area of information that instigates everything into getting shaped
on the lower, rougher plains of existence. Those pieces of information are
thoughts. Thoughts are ideas or information owing to which everything
exists. Since the world of ideas is the closest to ether or the quantum field in
its essence, in which everything is condensed into oneness timelessly,
together with all the possibilities of existence as well, all the information of
any potential existence is timelessly ever present in it. For this reason we
can think about anything at all, the past, the future, the present, and what
has not yet been manifested (and we call it fancy or imagination). This is
why in our thoughts, in the world of ideas, we can test all options and
combine them in all the possible ways, arriving at a logical conclusion on
the matter, or without making any sense.
Actually, it would be more accurate to say that activities of this world of
ideas, the element of air, happen on their own due to the proximity of the
quantum field (“above”), and the energy of fire (“below”), and the very

presence of the consciousness of the soul in the physical body makes it
happen in the body, in our head, because sahasrara is placed on our head.
The presence of the soul makes the activities of the higher dimensions, the
processing of ideas as well, take place in the body of man. Souls have
created the physical body of man in order to unify the phenomena of all the
dimensions and bring them to a higher awareness in one place, in the body
of man.
The presence of the consciousness of the soul gives focus to the
phenomena of all the ideas moving toward their meaning, the
understanding of the phenomena, bringing into awareness, the
consciousness of itself – which in the long run leads to the divine
consciousness that enables everything.
The nature of the quantum field or ether is timeless and spaceless, space
and time are constructed in the lower dimensions. Such frequencies of the
quantum field are often called non-Hertzian. The Hertzian frequencies
spread out in space and time. Non-Hertzian unlike Hertzian are static, they
do not spread out anywhere but are self-sufficient resembling the spheric
existence. Such is the nature of the quantum field. It was found to be the
unlimited source of all energy, it was named “the zero point”, or “the energy
of the zero point” or “the vacuum energy”. This energy was discovered by
Tesla and he named it non-Hertzian frequencies to be able to distinguish
them from the usual Hertzian the rest of the scientists work with.
A more detailed technical description would be as follows: the Scalar waves
(non-Hertzian) are generated by the interaction of two coherent
electromagnetic waves of the same frequency and the opposite phase. In
addition to that, the resulting energy field created by the permeating
opposing electromagnetic fields, does not bring forth their total annulment,
as it is commonly thought, but transforms the energy into the space of
vacuum, into the state of the potential and the creation of the so-called
Scalar field. The longitudinal wave (Hertzian) is the type of a wave where
the radiating of the particles of the medium oscillate in the direction of the
wave radiation. It can move only through substantial medium which
possesses the quality of elasticity. An example of the mechanical
longitudinal waves are sound waves in the air. Electromagnetic Scalar

waves can be generated by a corresponding modulation of plasmoid
structure phenomena. In that sense, lightning balls are one specific form of
the stationery electromagnetic field. Nikola Tesla not only created but
played with them. It was the lightning balls that originally gave him the
idea of the non-Hertzian frequencies.
To put it bluntly, the area of the Hertzian waves is the area below the speed
of light. This is the area we are able to perceive with our senses and our
physical mind. The area of the non-Hertzian waves exceeds the speed of
light, it is actually instantaneous. This is the area the physicists have
discovered as the nature of the quantum field, in which a particle can exist
as both, a particle and a wave, and that is entirely up to the awareness and
perception of the conscious subject. This area we are unable to perceive
with our senses and the physical mind, but we can access it with our inner
senses and our higher mind. Tesla was not short of the latter.
Therefore, the source of thoughts or ideas, the element of air, is non-
Hertzian, static, spheric and complete. This is the reason why thoughts are
so close to the timeless present, this is why they can transcend the space and
time. Thoughts actually represent the compression of information of
absolutely everything in space and time independently of space and time.
They can be such because they are the closest to ether or the quantum field.
They are at the top within the structure of the man's being, as the highest
chakra, sahasrara . As such this chakra is most profoundly non-Hertzian in
its nature, it is the most beyond space and time, above the man's body.
The thicker and the more solid space and time get in their conditioning and
functioning through the lower chakras , the more the Hertzian functioning
is expressed. The frequency of every lower chakra is correspondingly more
Hertzian.

The lowest chakra, muladhara , is the most Hertzian in its frequency. The
consciousness is exposed to the opposing factors of physical survival to the
maximum in it, to the illusion of the materiality, to the linear space and time
where the subject is alienated.
In other words, the frequency of the first chakra is the lowest, and the
frequency of the seventh is the highest.
The characteristics of the lower frequencies are materialism, and the higher
spirituality.
The first and the last chakra represent the ultimate polarization of existence,
the pure consciousness ( sahasrara ) and the most concrete existence (

muladhara ) which does not need consciousness or the feeling of sense, just
natural causality. Our spine with the complete system of chakras is like a
lever magnetized on the opposite poles, where the highest, sahasrara , is
made up of the non-Hertzian frequencies, and the first muladhara of
Hertzian ones.
This explains why our consciousness can have both the experience of
timeless presence (non-Hertzian nature of the quantum field) and the
experience of the solid materiality of linear time (the nature of Hertzian
frequencies) trapped by causality. It can be completely blinded by the
sensory, material world ( muladhara ), or to have experience of the
transcendental pure awareness of itself ( sahasrara ), or to be somewhere in
space and time, moving along the lines of those two extremes.
Chakras represent all the possibilities of the experience of existence, from
the most rudimentary and completely conditioned, to the pure awareness of
itself, of the sense of existence, of the unity of the divine consciousness of
itself, which is free to manifest itself in all the varieties of ways.
This opposite polarization of the man’s being, between the first and the last
chakra , enables the flow of energy through man. Man would not have the
energy for life if there were not for this polarization along his system of
chakras . Hence, the energy man uses in his life and work, in every
undertaking, is always connected to the state of his consciousness. The
system of chakras is called the psychoenergetic system for that reason.
Since the divine consciousness expresses itself into the existence according
to the model of the holograph, where every tiny detail contains all the
principles of the whole, the same way this polarization of all the chakras
from the Hertzian to the non-Hertzian frequency, reflects not only on the
entire system of chakras (from the first to the last chakra ), but each one
separately. Every chakra itself is polarized into the Hertzian and non-
Hertzian frequencies, energy of every chakra moves in the shape of torus, it
rotates from the center outward where it goes back to the center again.
This further enables their dynamics and the ability to grow and transform,
transfer energy from one on to the other, as well as the constant energetic
communication between all the chakras .

POLARIZATION OF OPPOSITES IN
CHAKRAS
Polarization of chakras does not exist merely in the nature of their
frequencies, but in the very relationship between consciousness and
existence. The full spectrum of chakras from the first down to the last
represents one big polarization between consciousness and the existence,
between conscious and unconscious, matter and spirit, awareness of unity
with the divine whole, and split consciousness, alienated from the whole.
Actually, all the chakras together represent the transition from the Hertzian
to the non-Hertzian frequencies of existence in seven stages.

In the highest chakra sahasrara , the awareness of unity is completely
present because existence is non-Hertzian there. As the consciousness keeps
descending down into existence, through the lower chakras , it becomes
increasingly more polarized following the principle of opposites, more and
more conditioned in rougher conditions, and exposed to the bigger dialectic
of opposites. In the lowest chakra , muladhara , consciousness exists in the
Hertzian frequencies and for that reason it is the most sensory, the
consciousness is completely polarized into opposites because at that point it
is the farthest away from its source, the divine consciousness of the soul, in
ignorance. The main characteristic of existence at that point is the lack of
awareness of itself, exposed to the unconscious causality and conditionality
of events.
It is often said that only urges and instincts prevail there. Struggle for
survival at all costs, even at the cost of other people's lives, is the dominant
feature there. It can be said that due to the maximum polarization and the
opposites in the lowest chakra , life has been led to the utter absurd.
Although all the energy originates from that point, life can turn into its own
opposition because man's lack of awareness makes him oblivious to all the
life around him, thus the functioning of this chakra drives him to kill to
survive. The functioning of the first chakra is both equally life-giving and
life-taking. In this way the opposition of the functioning of the first chakra
is maximally emphasized. It is the root of the downfall and all the suffering
of man, much to the same degree as it is the source of the life for the body.
Because of this Buddha said the cause of all suffering is in the drive for life.
Every higher chakra represents an ever bigger awareness of existence, ever
bigger recognition of the identical divine consciousness present in all
existence and therefore ever bigger propensity for expressing the
unconditional love. The consciousness keeps rising to a higher chakra by
becoming aware of the true nature of the lower chakra . Every chakra
represents a certain level of awareness, an outlook on the world, on the
reality. When the world is viewed with the strong identification in one
chakra only, it is very hard to resist subjectivity and one-sidedness. The
lower the chakra , the stronger the identification is. Identification of
consciousness in chakras is necessary for their proper functioning, the

energy itself moves centripetally in them to sustain the functioning of the
chakra .
Owing to the fact that a man's being possesses multiple chakras he can
transcend his subjectivity, compare various levels and states of
consciousness and strengthen the objective awareness. The objective
awareness is not situated in any center or chakra , or in any specific state of
consciousness, only in the experience of change of all the states of
consciousness through all the centers. The awareness of unity in the highest
chakra cannot be without the experience of opposites from the all lower
centers.
THE HIGHER AND THE LOWER
NATURE OF CHAKRAS
O ne of the most obvious characteristics of chakras is their vertical
alignment. Each one is higher or above the previous one. It is no
coincidence. The vertical position of the chakras gives us away the nature
of energy flow and its association with the states of consciousness. The
essence of man is connected with the way he looks, and especially the way
he moves. Unlike all other beings man is upright and this fact is not merely
a result of the evolution of movement, but it is closely associated with
focusing of consciousness and energy, for their movement from the lower to
the higher form of existence. All of this reflects on the position of chakras .
The polarization previously explained must somehow be expressed in the
three-dimensional space. The nature of the polarization of consciousness
and energy is such that in the three-dimensional space it is expressed as
something low, down, conditioned, hard and negative, and as something
that is high, exalted, easy and positive. The positive frequencies are “high”,
and negative “low”. In our experience everything that is negative and
conditioning is in a way low and down, everything that is positive and
exalted is up. Paradise is in heaven, and hell is under the ground.
Consciousness is in its essence unconditioned and all-embracing, and in
existence it is always expressed as a tendency to an even bigger level of

freedom and unconditionality, the surpassing of conditionality, the
transcendence. Hence, the entire existence is moving in the direction of an
ever bigger knowledge or the awareness of itself. It is expressed in
existence as the gradual improvement of functions, the evolution of living
beings in motion, action and perception, and the improvement of human
work and lifestyle. With fine, cultured manners we uplift the consciousness
and energy onto higher levels.
Every chakra is higher than the previous one, and it owes its position to its
meaning in relation to the lower chakra . Every chakra represents one
expression of higher consciousness in relation to the lower state of
consciousness, one victory over the lower state. We can recognize this in
experience. Every time we surpass some state that represented the lower,
conditioned consciousness, this transcendence we experience as true
uplifting. Our previous conduct, which was under the influence of the
consciousness of the lower chakra , from our newly gained perspective of
the higher consciousness seems to us as though some other lower being had
done it, definitely not us, our previous behavior (lower chakras ) we can
observe from above, more objectively, we are even in awe at how we could
have done something so low, negative and limiting.
Still, such an insight enables differentiation of the higher state of
consciousness, so we can say that this chakra alignment, from the lower to
the higher one, assists in differentiating the consciousness of every single
chakra . We can attain objective consciousness of each chakra only from
the higher perspective, when we rise from the lower to the higher one.
All human culture is based on such uplifting of the consciousness, from the
urge and unconscious drive of the lower chakras , to the higher more aware
conduct.
The principle of uplifting the consciousness according to the chakra system
is connected with the activity principle of the consciousness itself, with the
energy. When it moves downward, the energy is decreasing; when it moves
in the direction of the higher chakras the level of energy in them is
increasing. This motion corresponds with the states of consciousness. When
we are occupied with the conditioning of the lower centers we lose energy
and our consciousness is low, negative and conditioned. When we surpass

the unconscious conditionality of the lower urges and mechanical
conditioning in our deeds, we have more energy and a more objective
awareness.
The nature of the chakra impact is such that they connect the consciousness
in the body with energy. We cannot have the presence of consciousness
without energy. Higher level of energy is the necessary condition for the
higher presence of consciousness. Because of the way the consciousness
and energy are connected to one another we cannot use our energy in one
way hoping to achieve certain goals, and try to stay aware in a different
way, with different goals altogether. In other words, we cannot be servants
of sin and of righteousness simultaneously, we need to choose which chair
we are going to sit in. To do one thing, but to have other things on our
mind. Actually, we can, but that way we waste both our time and energy,
and deceive the consciousness.
Energy is phenomenon which follows the consciousness, or better yet, the
phenomenon which is induced by the very presence of the consciousness,
and in our body it moves upward and downward. It is due to the fact that it
moves from one chakra to another, from the bigger conditionality to the
smaller, from ignorance to cognition.
The vertical position of the chakras and the man himself has to do with the
earth's magnetism and the laws of physical attraction and conditioning of
the consciousness. In the vertical position every chakra relies
gravitationally on the lower one, every lower one, somehow, protects the
higher one, it serves as the foundation, thus exposing higher chakras to less
gravitational pull which facilitates its uprising. In the horizontal position
every chakra is equally exposed to the earth's gravity and the physical
conditioning. For this reason it is a passive position, adequate for sleeping
only. Therefore, upright posture is the only correct position for meditation,
upright position is the only proper state for awareness, that is for activating
the energy and awareness from the lowest to the highest chakra . Even the
stoop posture reflects some blocking of movement of energy and
consciousness, the negative state.
To be able to understand this better we must remind ourselves that gravity is
electrostatic phenomenon of huge proportions. Planets and all the celestial

bodies are electromagnets which induce life energy with their sole
movement. Life energy is also induced between the earth itself and the
ionosphere. The entire nature is designed to be the stage of the dynamic
electromagnetic relationships. The chakras in us are nothing but the small
holographic models of this gigantic electromagnetic cosmic phenomenon.
Therefore, we must see clearly the nature of the frequency of these three
groups of chakras , which we have determined to be motoric or mechanical,
emotional and intellectual. Every phenomenon is based on the
corresponding frequencies. The lowest group of the first three chakras , in
charge of the mechanical behavior, consists of the low frequencies. The
three top chakras that constitute the intellectual center, consist of the higher
and finer frequencies.
The characteristic of the low frequencies are agony and fear, the narrowing
of the consciousness, identification, conditionality and addiction, and
everything in connection with materialism. Those are the characteristics of
the first three chakras that function spontaneously in majority of people.
The characteristic of the high or fine frequencies is freedom and the clarity
of perception and the higher presence of consciousness, positive feelings
and frankness. Those are characteristics of the top three chakras (5,6 and 7).
The negative archonite forces that rule this world base their dominance on
strengthening the focus on the first three chakras and use this to control
human behavior, they increase the functioning of the lower center by
narrowing the consciousnesses and the perception and limiting them to the
material aspects of life only (often done through their controlled media and
education), forcing people to live in constant fear and struggle for survival
(by inducing perpetual warfare, conflicts as well as the economic instability
and dependence).
The thing with frequencies is simple: the one we choose to emphasize is the
one we live with. The nature of the frequency modulates our perception. By
changing the frequency we change the perception, and with it the reality we
are in. However, the nature of every frequency is momentary and therefore,
prone to change, in other words, it is always virtual, it is based on freedom.
Consciousness can always change every frequency, every perception and

every reality. The only important thing is to have enough awareness, and
with it enough energy.
Therefore, if we live in a virtual reality, which keeps conditioning us, amply
supported by the negative archonite forces, then all we have to do is to
change the frequency, to change the state of consciousness. It is always
possible because it is already in us.
The consciousness of the soul is our essence, and not any frequency of any
chakra .
Various frequencies of various chakras merely caught in their whirlpool the
consciousness of our soul and dazzled it to identify temporarily with the
states characterized by the certain frequencies of phenomena. It would be
more accurate to say that the very divine consciousness of our soul
orchestrated the whole affair. It is all its hide-and-seek game to reveal all its
possibilities, everything it in its essence represents.
THE FUNDAMENTAL NATURE
AND THE MEANING OF EVERY
CHAKRA
C hakras represent the seven basic phases in which consciousness and
existence merge and manifest.
That is why there are seven different levels of consciousness and existence
in man which the yoga system of chakras best depicts:
1) Deep sleep without dreams ( muladhara )
2) Dreaming ( svadhisthana )
3) Average daily experience of being awake ( manipura )
4) Testifying of the previous three ( anahata )

5) Mental awareness of the divine consciousness ( vishuddhi )
6) Enabling the body to allow the transcendental divine consciousness take
active and direct participation in the existence ( ajna ), and
7) The complete openness of the being for the presence of the divine
consciousness of the soul; the disappearance of any identification with the
objective existence due to the complete openness for the presence of the
divine consciousness of the soul, that is, the disappearance of any difference
between existence and the divine consciousness that enables it ( sahasrara
).
The first level is the state of pure existence, as well as the seventh, but the
first one is unaware of itself while the seventh one is completely aware of
itself and its unity with the existence.
It goes without saying, the seventh level is the only one authentic to reality,
while all the others express levels of unconsciousness of reality and the
gradual processes of becoming aware of the reality. All the dynamics and
versatility of existence are expressed through those processes of awareness.
The first three levels or states of consciousness, deep sleep, dreams and the
state of being awake, correspond with the first three chakras : muladhara ,
svadhisthana and manipura . Most people act naturally with them, which
means they do so without any spiritual culture and willful intention. They
can be recognized as urges (the first), desires (the second) and the will for
power (the third chakra ). The fourth chakra ( anahata ) corresponds with
the fourth state of consciousness or the first temporary experiences of the
transcendental consciousness, the consciousness of unity with the divine
consciousness in the existence itself.
The fifth chakra ( vishuddhi ) corresponds with the fifth state of
consciousness in which the transcendental consciousness consolidates as
the steady consciousness, but on the level of knowledge and its expression
only, not the entire being. It reflects the mental understanding of
consciousness and existence. The sixth chakra ( ajna ) corresponds with the
sixth state of consciousness which the transcendental consciousness of the
soul permanently unveils in the whole being, pure and complete perception

of the divine consciousness in existence happens, the type of perception one
cannot describe with thoughts, the one which surpasses the mind. The
seventh chakra ( sahasrara ) corresponds with the seventh state of
consciousness which represents the highest presence of the divine
consciousness in the body and the physical world in general.
1. Muladhara
Muladhara is the first or the root chakra . It connects us to the pure energy
of nature, with the energy of planet Earth. For that reason it is placed in the
crotch area. Our body receives all the vital energy for life from this chakra
in the most elementary sense, whole and unpolarized. We get our instinct
for survival from it in its most original form. Its color is dark red. In its
functioning it is neutral, it supports and gives strength to everything this
energy is put in. It contains the primordial energy of nature, a shakti , called
kundalini . Its very name points to the fact that it is there like a "curled up
snake", or in other words, it exist there as the potential waiting to develop
through higher centers by uniting itself with consciousness, with awareness.
Outside the man the principles of this chakra express pure nature, vital
energy which gives life to everything without making any exceptions.
However, this should not be understood quite literary, because the energy
for manifesting is received by both positive as well as the most negative
phenomena. This chakra in its negative aspect expresses the loss of energy,
which in human experience means death and destruction of life in all forms.
The annihilation of life is the negative side of this chakra , its energy is
completely unconscious and therefore it is capable of destroying life in an
effort to save it at all costs. One simple example would be when a person
who is limited to the functioning of this chakra , eats too much food and
very unhealthy at that out of a need for more energy, to live and survive,
while at the same time they are doing the exact opposite – killing
themselves with food. Another example of negative functioning of this
chakra is shamelessly taking life energy in all the available ways possible
and often in a destructive manner.
Due to its neutrality, together with the influence of all other planets, the
most corresponding influence would be that of Mercury.

2. Svadhisthana
Svadhisthana is the second chakra placed above the first, in the region of
the sexual organs. It indicates that the original vital energy from the first
chakra for the first time polarizes in it for the sake of giving birth to new
forms of life. It is the source of sexuality and all the ways we use to
exchange energy, in our body, with other people and with the surroundings.
Because of the energy exchange, here it is the source of all the joys
connected with body, which is especially expressed through sexuality, but
all their opposites, as well, like hatred, anger, despise and cruelty, it is the
source of all conflicts and violence towards life. Since svadhisthana chakra
has dual nature, in a man with low level of consciousness sexuality is
always associated with violence and hate. It is far from the source of
consciousness and objective knowing (the sixth and the seventh chakras ),
and in the close proximity of the first chakra , the pure energy where the
imperative is to survive, consciousness in the second chakra is expressed as
the principle of complacency in every way, shape or form. In translation its
name means "in its own center". Consciousness which is expressed through
this chakra justifies and rationalizes all the actions that relate to the
principle of pleasure and survival, from love to hate.
The first two chakras have the highest energetic pull, they are, in terms of
energy, the strongest in man. The first chakra manifests its power in the
struggle for survival and maintaining the life of body in every possible way.
The second chakra manifests its power and attraction through the struggle
for survival, too, but in exchange with the other sex, through the sexual
exchange. It is logical that life energy gets expressed this way first.
Sexuality is strong for the reason that it must be that way for the beings to
keep multiplying and for the species not to die out.
In sexuality we feel filled with life the most that there could be (because
this chakra is the closest to the very source of life energy, the first chakra ).
The consciousness itself does not possess the instinct for multiplying
because it is omnipresent as the origin of existence. It is necessary that the
power of beings, materiality and energy be stronger than consciousness, that
the instinct for reproduction survive. This strength is justified, but due to its
low position and proximity in comparison to the source of consciousness

(the seventh chakra ) it is exposed to big polarization, the law of opposites,
and is therefore often linked with the negation of life in all forms, and most
of all in sexuality with all the destructiveness and violence. Sexuality that
creates life, is the source of the biggest pleasure in this world, and it has
always been hand in hand with the perversions, with twisted life.
Because of the lack of objective consciousness and the proximity of the life
energy source, sexual pleasure can be found in almost anything, with the
same sex, with some objects, even with animals, all it takes is to experience
this type of pleasure and it will become an obsession, with all the rational
explanations and justifications. Mind on the level of the second chakra
always justifies all the actions that follow the principle of pleasure.
For this reason sexuality has always been the biggest challenge of the
presence of the consciousness in existence. It is a very powerful tool for the
transformation of energy of the lower being (the first three chakras ) into
the higher forms of existence in the science of tantra , but, at the same time,
due to its power it has always been the key cause of the decline of
consciousness of the soul in the body, with all the following consequences.
Outside man, in the world, the principle of the second chakra is manifested
in everything that Eros represents, in all the shapes of beauty and pleasure,
from flowers and the birds twittering whose singing has the sexual function
of multiplying, the beauty of all the people and all human activities which
relate to beauty and fun in all forms, from the darkest places where people
experience the lowest passions with all the negative consequences, but
which are always justified and rationalized, most often as human rights and
liberties, while in reality they are nothing but licentiousness. This chakra is
directly responsible for licentiousness being wrongly interpreted as
freedom and a very desirable one at that. Although it brings nothing but the
loss of energy through the activities of this chakra .
Due to the principle of complacency this chakra , together with the
influence of other planets, astrologically best fits the profile of Venus. Its
color is orange.
3. Manipura

The third chakra is manipura , or "the city of jewels". It is placed above the
navel. Unlike the first and the second chakra which get their energy from
the Earth completely raw ( muladhara ), and in the state of basic
polarization ( svadhisthana ), the energy is received from cosmos here,
from the wider whole. For this reason it is used in far more versatile ways
and with much higher level of awareness. Unlike the functioning of the first
two chakras , which is limited to the body and the instincts for survival at
all costs, and the polarization of energy through sexuality and the principle
of joy, for the first time, energy is used for something else here, it has other
goals that are not concerned with body and its survival, but the entire
human society and other beings, the wider concept. The energy in united
and used for the purpose of mutual benefit, general well-being. From this
point onward consciousness begins to affect a more cultured lifestyle, it is
not only conditioned by the personal actions and reactions. The
consciousness builds culture and civilization in this sphere. Hence its title
which refers to "the city of jewels" or the perfect city.
Man who has surpassed with his consciousness the first two chakras ,
becomes a creator on other fields of life now, not just perpetually nurturing
his physical body. Here he develops the awareness of the wider community
and the interests of the society. While he was using the energy of the first
two chakras for his survival only, and for personal sexual pleasure, here he
uses it for higher goals, above all, for the prosperity and survival of his
family, for creating offspring and getting married, as well as taking an
active role in the life of the community, who share the same set of values.
Outside man, in the world, it can be said that the divine consciousness
created all civilization and material culture in this world by means of the
third chakra . With all the struggle and perseverance necessary for such an
accomplishment.
Therefore, because of the effort to rise above the first two chakras , together
with the influence of all the other planets, astrologically this chakra the
most appropriately corresponds with Mars. Its color is yellow.
4. Anahata

The first three chakras represent the first, the lower group of chakras , the
instinctive or the motoric center. This center (comprised of the first three
chakras ) is in charge of movement and functioning of the consciousness in
the physical body.
When awareness of the mind itself gains enough power, the fourth level of
consciousness appears as intuitive overcoming of the first three, and the
ability to testify about them. The first three levels are provided by nature
and for their everyday change and functioning nothing is required, letting
go is enough since they are usually all it takes for the natural survival, in
most cases. Because of this simple fact most people reside in them their
entire life, with rare and short elevations to the fourth level of
consciousness, usually induced by some emotional trauma, or powerful
imagination. The permanent realization of the fourth level is the outcome of
disciplined spiritual practice and dedicated effort for the man to uplift above
the gravity of natural survival, from the first three states. (Such spiritual
discipline is found in the Buddhist practice of contemplation, zazen ,
satipatthana and dhyana ). It is functioning not previously determined by
nature and which is allowed to a small number of individuals only, because
for the survival of the organic life it is necessary that the majority of people
are conditioned by the spontaneous reproduction on the first three levels.
One of the chief characteristics of the fourth level of consciousness is that
due to the practice of contemplation and occasional experiences of the pure,
transcendental awareness of oneself, that is consciousness that is purer than
thoughts, all the notions and of the body itself, suddenly the experiences of
being awake during sleep phase, in the astral world, more accurately the
first out-of-body experiences start to happen. This is a transitional state and
relates to the beginning of the man's practical work on the awakening. It
corresponds with the activation of the fourth chakra anahata . The first
experiences of unity with the divine consciousness take place here. With the
first out-of-body experiences the first experience of unity with the divine
appear. They are always followed by utter and complete love and bliss
toward the existence in any way, shape or form, because the awareness of
the divine cannot be experienced otherwise, it is the unconditional love that
makes everything possible.

If the work on oneself proves to be successful, the fifth state of
consciousness surfaces in which the man finally distinguishes between his
own alertness and the unconscious conditionality of the overall natural
phenomena. Being awaken he now sees the entire nature as one unique
whole and, because of such insight, he recognizes his own freedom and
independence ( kaivalya ) from that whole, from what is happening. He sees
nature as a unique whole because he himself has become unique and whole,
he has become the personification of such reality, since now as awakened
he is able to recognize it, it takes one to know one. Materiality disappears
and spirituality emerges as the only perspective that is now perfectly clear,
which causes love and bliss ( ananda ).
All of this is the description of the fourth chakra , anahata . The word in
translation means "unimpaired", which indicates wholeness, the first
experiences of the whole consciousness of oneself and the objective reality
we get from the higher intellectual center, the top three chakras . Its name
also means "unhurt" which points to the overcoming of suffering which is
characteristic of the first three levels of existence or chakras , more
accurately as the bliss, as the most direct experience of the unconditional
love, which is the only objective reality.
The symbol of this chakra is hexagram, two triangles set in opposite
positions, one pointing downward and the other pointing upward. The
triangle pointing downward represents the consciousness of the soul which
descends into the body, the matter, and the triangle pointing upward
represents the uplifting of such an awakened existence toward the divine
consciousness of the soul. Therefore, it is a very appropriate symbol of
merging and uniting the higher and the lower centers in this chakra .
Love which man is capable of is just a tiny reflection of the unconditional
divine love which enables the very existence, love that is the divine
consciousness itself, whose tiny part we use as our own consciousness.
Every time we grow closer to the objective reality we are unable to
distinguish this consciousness from the unconditional love for everything;
we are unable to experience it in any other way but as the unconditional
love for everything. Actually, only such love can bring us such

consciousness. It always goes together. The merging of consciousness and
existence happens as the emanation of the unconditional divine love.
That is why their unity is placed in the heart of man, in the chakra anahata ,
between the source of consciousness and the source of existence.
The principle of the consciousness moving along chakras is as follows: it
descends from the highest chakra to the lowest, from the soul to the matter
and the physical body; this way, with its own presence consciousness
attracts energy to express itself in ever more complex and exalted ways,
through the higher chakras , with its own presence consciousness lifts
energy upward; in every chakra there is a unity of consciousness and
energy in accordance with the nature of chakra .
All it takes to conduct the consciousness to the lowest chakra and enable
life energy from the first chakra to get uplifted to the higher centers and
chakras , to finalize the complete unity of consciousness and existence, is to
set the functioning of all chakras properly, because the proper unity of
consciousness and energy does not happen due to the dysfunctioning
chakras . To properly harmonize the chakra functioning means to
understand their functioning and the principles of their functioning. Only
that. We can comprehend everything fully only from the central point,
anahata chakra , which unites the higher and the lower group.
Consciousness and energy actually constantly circulate through all the
chakras and through the whole body, from top to bottom. All it takes is to
make it aware, to understand the functioning of every single center, the way
it works, and why it works the way it does, and that is possible only if we
surpass the consciousness of the lower chakra with the consciousness of
the higher chakra .
Therefore, chakra activation and the rising of kundalini from the first
chakra cannot be achieved by repeating any mantras. It can only be
achieved with the deeper understanding of the way we exist through every
individual chakra , by expressing the awareness in existence through every
single chakra . This way, consciousness acts on its own accord by rising
kundalini in the only correct way. Any artificial attempt made by using
some exercises can only increase the power of the unconsciousness. To give

more energy to the unconsciousness and ignorance is the recipe for disaster.
Many people have experienced the spontaneous awakening of kundalini , or
it was otherwise induced by some circumstances, but the upsurge of energy
into higher centers or chakras was not followed with the bigger
understanding and awareness. In turn, such people experienced wider
perception without realizing what it entails. Such people fall victims to
disturbed behavior and perception they fail to grasp. Psychiatric clinics are
packed full with these cases.
When man's growth is at stake, consciousness is at the first and at the last
place in order of importance. The disruption in the functioning of any
chakra is possible only due to lack of awareness, or more accurately, due to
the disruption in harmony between the consciousness and energy (the way
we exist, act).
Outside man the principle of the anahata chakra is manifested as the divine
love which enables everything. It manifests in the world in the man's
goodness and unconditional love, the deeds of love, through the man who
has become aware of the divine existence, or the very existence as the
divine consciousness.
Due to the magnitude and significance of this chakra , together with the
influence of all the other planets, this chakra is best described by the
astrological influence of Jupiter. Its color is green.
5. Vishuddhi
The activation of the fifth chakra vishuddhi is characterized by the ability to
express the nature of reality in the thought and verbal form, as the
awareness of unity. This expression is on the highest level of understanding
which can possibly be achieved both in thoughts and words.
The ability to understand everything ( anahata chakra ) goes together with
the ability to express our understanding. Actually, only once we
successfully express a certain state of consciousness or the way of
existence, we have successfully comprehended it. The name of this chakra
is purification , it brings the final cleansing of all impurities or ambiguity.

Through this chakra existence expresses itself in all forms of
communication in the process of joining the meaning and sense of things,
from language and writing, to science and art. Here we finally distinguish
between the sense and the true meaning, the revelation of truth. It means
that the negative aspect of this chakra is its hiding. Through this chakra the
world of ideas acts as the inspiration for action, will is expressed in both
words and thoughts. Hence, this chakra is important for the functioning of
the mind or thoughts, for the culture of thought and the ways of expressing
energy in general.
Due to the thorough distinguishing between right from wrong, the
purification of everything erroneous, this chakra , together with all the
other planets, is best associated with the influence of Saturn. Its color is
blue.
6. Ajna
If the fifth chakra was the complete expressing, the sixth, ajna chakra , is
the complete perception. Consciousness in this chakra perceives here that
what with the senses (using senses for perception is the job of the first three
chakras ) is impossible to detect, and the sixth chakra may have the
supernatural perception owing to the emotional maturity (the mature fourth
chakra ), and the ability to express this maturity (the mature fifth chakra ).
Without these preconditions, meaning the maturity of all the previous
chakras , it is not possible to use any shortcuts in order "to activate the third
eye", or more accurately, the sixth chakra .
The correct insight into reality is possible only when the functioning of the
first three chakras is harmonized, when they are tuned, in other words,
when the functioning of the motoric and the instinctive centers are
awakened, which means that the consciousness gains superiority, when at
heart, at the center of emotional maturity the functioning of the higher and
the lower centers is harmonized, and consequently adequately expressed
(the fifth chakra ). Only then is it possible to activate the sixth chakra or
"the third eye", practically, only then is it possible to perceive reality
correctly. Besides, every higher chakra is activated by surpassing the lower
one, more precisely, by awakening the functioning of the lower one, when

one reaches the principle of objective consciousness of the lower chakra
replacing the instinctive principle of survival.
The position of this chakra points to its connection with the pineal gland
which secretes dimethyltryptamine (DMT) which acts as the molecular link
with the higher consciousness. DMT is set for accepting the consciousness
of the higher mind in the body. Depending on its ability to accept the
vibrations of the higher consciousness it further causes the secretion of
neurotransmitter serotonin and the hormone melatonin, which regulate
further physiological processes in accordance with the acceptance of the
presence of the higher consciousness in the body by the lower or the
physical mind. It would be the physiological explanation why this chakra is
placed here, in the center of the head, behind the eyes, and why it is called
“the third eye”. The real meaning of its name is “know” or “obey”.
The clearer understanding of its physiological impact gives us its link to the
sunlight. The pineal gland is connected to the eyes through which it
receives UV radiation from the sun. UV radiation is of key importance for
the functioning of this gland, and via the pineal gland for the functioning of
the entire immune system and our health. Photons that come from the sun
are actually, the light codes, this gland receives information crucial for our
existence via the sun's radiation. Since our DNA is basically a form of light
code, it is a process through which our DNA gets information and is able to
stay alive, via the sun. Sun is, in reality, the light of the divine
consciousness, the radiation of the consciousness of the soul on a far higher
level than the one which is incarnated in the human body. This way, the
consciousness of the soul in the body merges with the consciousness of the
soul on a far higher, cosmic level via the sunlight, the light codes, the
photons, via the pineal gland. [10]
This chakra is associated with the notion of chittakasha in the science of
yoga. It is the space of consciousness or the mind, more accurately, here the
space ( akasha ) which enables everything becomes directly mentally
known ( chitta ), the world of ideas or thoughts joins (air) with akasha (the
quantum field). If the fifth chakra ( vishuddhi ) was mental expression,
speech and word, here it is the consciousness that is behind the thoughts.

Therefore, we awaken this chakra and fully activate it when we are
witnesses to the thoughts, to the whole mind as such.
Consciousness is the closest to the quantum field in ajna , therefore, it
possesses the purest consciousness that ever could be in the body, the
consciousness which is the closest to the quantum mind, the field
everything emanates from, and everything belongs to. Therefore, the name
ajna chakra also means “command”, because consciousness from this
chakra has the power to create, thoughts are directly materialized in reality.
For this reason this chakra is tied to the manifestation of the super powers (
sidhi ). Nature is obedient to man when he acts from this chakra .
Since consciousness detects in this chakra what cannot be detected by
normal senses, independently of the space and time, this chakra is best
defined by the astrological influence of the planet Uranus. Its color is
purple.
7. Sahasrara
When man perceives reality for what it is, he is no longer conditioned by
nature because it has already achieved its purpose, he has surpassed
everything that ties him to the being and time and he has become the place
of opening toward the consciousness of the soul which enables the
existence as such, and surpasses it by far. It is the state of such alertness
where any individuality and corporeality are barely noticeable at all,
because the complete and permanent awakening is the direct expression of
the man's unity with the whole, more accurately, the unity with the divine
consciousness which enables existence in its entirety.
The complete alertness is the complete participation in the entire existence,
but at the same time, it denotes the complete independence of the complete
existence. A different form of alertness is not possible, because it is unity
with the transcendental Absolute which is at the same time man's essence.
Therefore, a man having recognized his unity with it, ceases to be different
from it the same way water does not differ from water while in water, air
from air, light from light. It all represents the seventh chakra sahasrara ,
which is at the top of the head. It is placed just a little above the top of the
head, which denotes its transcendental nature, its independence of the body.

Its name is “a thousand fold”, which means that it is infinite and
unconditioned. The color is white.
This is the higher mind of man, the higher consciousness that makes man
aware of everything in the existence. This higher consciousness man has as
the bond with his own soul, it is the consciousness of the soul which has not
yet embodied itself, but it has stayed close enough and kept its
independence of the body and bodily mind, in order to be the guarantee for
the man's awakening and the awareness of himself, of his transcendental
soul. It becomes completely awaken only with the complete awakening of
the functioning of the remaining lower chakras , when we are objectively
aware of every form of existence, of the nature of every action, of our
whole being, and that means completely independent of everything.
The transcendental nature of this chakra which is represented with its
position just a little above the top of the head signifies its independence of
the body, of the being and of existence. The essence of the consciousness is
in its independence of the being, that is why it is said that it surpasses or
transcends it. Owing to this fact consciousness can make every
phenomenon of the being fully aware. If the consciousness on the same
level as the being, or in unity with it, there never could be the objective
consciousness about the whole being and every phenomenon. "Objective"
means "independent", but at the same time it means "true". Those three
notions are one and the same in the meaning of consciousness.
Consciousness loses its objectivity and veracity to the exact degree it gets
itself identified with the being. The identification of the consciousness
brings all the problems of the human existence, all the problems of the
incarnation of the soul in the body, all the problems of ignorance ( avidya )
as the cause of all the suffering and all human and life dramas, and all the
karma , as well.
This chakra is the source of the consciousness of the soul in man. Without
it, people would be just highly developed animals. In most people it may be
inactive, or very slightly active, mostly through the activities that do not get
recognized as its activities, through intuition and creative imagination,
dreams, it can have its outward influence, but also the inward impact, as

well, more often than not, it acts indirectly, through the synchronicity in the
chain of events.
Due to such nature of this chakra very often it is unrecognized or clear to
people, although it represents openness for the consciousness of the soul
and for the divine consciousness, this chakra is best defined by the
astrological influence of the planet Neptune.
THE PRINCIPLES OF CHAKRA
FUNCTIONING
IN THE WORLD AND HISTORICAL
DEVELOPMENT
T he functioning of the first chakra was the expression of the pure, natural,
cosmic energy. The second one is the cell division and the development of
all organic life in all the life forms. The third one is the development of
society and settlements, the beginning of culture and civilization. The
fourth one was marked by the appearance of Christ and the first idea of
joining the divine consciousness and existence through man, and
emphasizing the divine love as the principle of consciousness and existence.
The fifth chakra represents the uniting of world and people on the
information level, the start of education and literacy, the beginning and
development of the critical way of thinking. It denotes the period from the
Renaissance to the modern day living. The sixth chakra will be the correct
perception of the objective reality and its implementation in this world.
That is yet to come in the following centuries. It is the age of the quantum
mind which will bring together all the ancient knowledge of the divine
consciousness with subatomic world, the practical realization of the
quantum consciousness and the awareness of the essence of nature. Once
this has been properly implemented only then will the seventh chakra be
fully realized as the presence of the divine consciousness in this world
through man and his deeds. This can happen only in the next millennium.

The principles of chakra functioning in the world can be observed in the
manner of living. The lower chakras are a characteristic of the natural
existence that apart from its beauty and vitality contain all the
unconsciousness and baseness in every way. Everything that is ugly, bad,
restricting and unworthy of man is the characteristic of the manifestation of
the lower centers. Everything that is exalted, beautiful and harmonious, the
obvious result of work and knowing, perfecting, liberating and creation is
the characteristic of the manifestation of the higher centers. All of this is
inseparable from the human actions and the state of consciousness. That is
why the principles of functioning in the world are the same as in man, and
the reason why there is the system of chakras : the state of the world cannot
be divided from the state and the deed of man. The system of chakras
unities the outer world with the man's psyche and actions. In other words,
the man's reality is not separated from the reality of the world he lives in. If
it happens to be the case, it is due to the dysfunctionality in the operating of
the centers and insufficient consciousness in man.
The more the consciousness is realized through the upper chakras , the
bigger the influence of the consciousness and the understanding of
everything lower is; the more the consciousness is tied in its functioning to
the lower chakras , the more it is restricted, disintegrated, divided and less
authentic and influential. This is how it reflects in the world.
The evolution of consciousness on this planet through the material culture
and the development of the civilization is conducted only through the
activation of the consciousness through the higher, top chakras .
EXAMPLES OF CHAKRA
FUNCTIONING
IN THE HISTORY OF SPIRITUALITY
T he Hertzian nature of chakras and their polarization are the key
component to every true spirituality, although the phrasing may be
somewhat different. Perhaps the best example of this would be the teaching
of the Buddhist reformer from the second century, Nagarjuna, who

established the two aspects of reality, the absolute ( paramartha ) or the
transcendent one (non-Hertzian), and the relative ( samvrti ) that is the
empirical one (Hertzian). The absolute one refers to the nature of ether or
the quantum field which in simplest words could be described as the
emptiness only ( sunya ). Today we refer to it as the awareness of now.
Nagarjuna taught that although we empirically experience only the
manifested, Hertzian aspect of existence, it essentially still resides on the
non-Hertzian aspect, on ether or the quantum consciousness. It would not
be able to exist otherwise because the very nature of the quantum field has
no plural. Therefore, nothing exists all by itself. He taught that the void of
the quantum field is at the heart of all things and phenomena, and that our
final cognition or state of awakeness is the one and the same quantum
consciousness.
Lao Tzu also spoke of the same thing when he pointed to the difference
between Tao (the non-Hertzian aspect) and Te (the Hertzian aspect) and
when he brought down all our wisdom to the ability of distinguishing
between the two aspects of reality in the nature of existence as well as in
any action we undertake.
The science of tantra , from the pre-Vedic India to the Chinese alchemists,
works with these two aspects of consciousness all energy emanates from
going through all the psychoenergetic centers or chakras .
The essence of Patanjali's practice of yoga, or meditation, consists of the
idea of achieving pure transcendental consciousness, which is exactly the
type of consciousness that expresses itself through the quantum field.
Meditation or the mental stillness is achieving the non-Hertzian state of
mind, and such mind resonates in harmony with the universal quantum
field.
In the works of Carlos Castaneda the Hertzian frequency of existence is
described as tonal , and the non-Hertzian as nagual .
In other spiritual traditions this reality is hidden away in various ways and
made into a myth or dogma. Only the recent discoveries of quantum physics
revealed the connection of nature of the quantum field with the ancient
teachings. [11]

EXAMPLES OF CHAKRA
FUNCTIONING
IN THE MAN'S PERSONAL
DEVELOPMENT
I n the man’s development there is a process of energy exchange in which
we can recognize the impact of chakras . For example, the second chakra is
in charge of sexuality, more precisely it is in charge of the exchange of
energy with the opposite sex. If is expressed without the higher
consciousness, without the consciousness of the higher third chakra , it will
remain tied to the lower, first chakra , and then such sexuality will be
manifested as the raw energy exchange, usually expressed in a promiscuous
way. The influence of the second chakra refers to any kind of partying,
having fun, as well. If the sexual energy exchange gets connected with the
awareness of the higher, third chakra , it will express itself as the permanent
union of a loving couple planning a family. Therefore, quite a bit more than
the temporary satisfaction of the sexual exchange. Actually, only with such
connecting of the consciousness of the higher chakra , the sexual exchange
will be the real exchange that brings forth the real pleasure. If it is aimed at
itself, only it causes the loss of energy. Every chakra reaches its true
potential only when it is directed at the values of the following higher
chakra .
It practically means that sex without love upsets the energy balance. For
that reason it continually seeks to find balance and fulfillment always in the
wrong way, by changing partners, that is, by repeating the same mistake of
connecting the consciousness of the second chakra to the first, instead of
the third chakra . To direct the consciousness from the second to the higher,
third chakra , one should understand that sex is not out there merely for the
purpose of having fun, but for conception, and for love, it is the most
intimate and the most beautiful expression of love.

When the requirements of the third chakra have been met, and that is a
permanent union of two people and offspring as the higher goal of
conscious input of life energy, then we are met with the functioning of the
fourth chakra , the act of love. Then energy is exchanged with the entire
existence, and not just the opposite sex. Once we are acquainted with life
and see it develop through the child we brought into this world, we are
forced to recognize that this life and this consciousness exists in all the
children, in all the beings, in the entire existence. This is how the fourth
chakra , anahata , gets activated. When it is active, the unconditional divine
love is recognized throughout the entire existence. Maybe we conceived a
child for the reasons of being in love (the transition from the second to the
third chakra ), but this child, once we get to know it, reveals the presence of
the divine love, which the realization of the fourth chakra brings us.
Children are born out of love, and only out of love. Only children filled
with love can implement all these processes correctly.
The full activation of the higher chakras , the fifth, sixth and the seventh, in
the higher intellectual center, is a matter of individual growth and conscious
effort, the spiritual work on oneself, and their full potential gets realized by
a tiny few, although it is out there for everyone, available for the taking. If
there is hindrance, it is only due to ignorance and malfunctioning of the
lower centers. Hence, the fifth chakra is the ability to communicate based
on all the previously acquired maturity as a result of the growth of
consciousness through the lower chakras . Those are all the words of wise
men that have stood the test of time. The sixth chakra is the ability to view
all things clearly. The seventh chakra is the pure consciousness of oneself.
Although the topic here is the gradual activation of chakras , what we have
in mind is their full activation and realization of their potential. They all,
however, already function in their most basic form. The first chakra gives
us all our life energy; the second one gives us all sensual joys, fun and
pleasure; the third one enables the awareness of some joint goal, every time
we do something with other people, when we work on something that will
benefit the community, we use the potential of the third chakra ; the fourth
heart chakra we use with every manifestation of the emotional maturity, of
love and compassion, the true understanding and unity with the whole; in
fifth chakra we speak and express our maturity; in the sixth one we

perceive everything that can be perceived, even that what goes beyond the
standard sensory perception. In the seventh chakra we are connected with
the consciousness of our soul, with the divine consciousness that enables
everything. From it we receive consciousness into all the remaining chakras
. Every chakra is realized by the strengthening the very consciousness of
itself. With the proper functioning of the chakras the awareness returns
back to itself to sahasrara , to samadhi , to the unity of consciousness and
existence.
Whenever we do something positive and right we uplift the consciousness
from the lower to the higher chakra . When we do something negative and
destructive we lower our consciousness to the lower centers.
Through a normal individual life energy flows and goes up in that order,
that is the way chakras get activated and that is the way man grows.
Everything that is not normal in man and the human society takes place
when this growth is stopped and blocked in the first three centers, or when
the functioning of the energy centers gets mixed somehow and disrupts
altogether. We can see that in the end the divine consciousness merges in
the highest chakra with itself through an awakened individual, in samadhi .
The divine consciousness as the unconditional love is the strongest force in
all existence. It incites everything and it has the strongest pull. Everything
revolves around it. It is accessible to every man through the fourth, heart
chakra , through the experience of love.
In order for this psychoenergetic development to be properly finalized, it is
necessary for the man at the very beginning of his life to go through this
experience of the unconditional divine love, first of all to have the idea of
what it really is, and that it can exist in this world, because many
adversities of this world keep such things in hiding. This divine
unconditional, absolute love and kindness a child can and must experience
only through the parental love and motherly hug and gentleness. That is all
it takes for the entire lifetime, so that man knows it exists, it is possible, and
so he could correctly develop through all his energy centers and to be able
to transfer this experience onto another individual. Those who never
experienced it in childhood and do not know or believe that it exists, that
the unconditional love and goodness are possible in this world, since those

are the greatest attractions and motivation, will attempt to seek it in all the
possible ways all their life, including the more deviant ones.
All the human creation rests on this aspiration. All the evil among people is
brought about in the same way: due to the lack of the experience of love
and goodness, due to the lack of belief that they are possible always and
forever. (It is not in vain when we hear about a violent person being
described with words that “his mother did not love him”. Very often that
turns out to be the true cause of his antisocial behavior.) All positive human
deeds testify of the various aspects of experiencing the divine
consciousness, love and goodness, and all the wrongdoings testify of the
lack of this experience.
Two additional things need to be mentioned here. Firstly, in the ancient
societies, in the original human communities of this world, had a tradition
which naturally conducted consciousness in every individual from the lower
to the higher chakras . All the customs and norms were actually made for
this purpose.
The term dharma in Indian tradition connects the cosmic order with the
human life and development.
The second crucial fact that should be known about the functioning of
chakras , especially their dysfunctional operating, is that the rulers of this
world, who generate all the negativities on this planet, but the material
progress as well, focus their attention on disrupting the proper functioning
of the chakras , particularly the first three such as sexuality, most
commonly displaying all the perversions and unconscious licentiousness of
the lower centers as “human rights and freedoms”.
By doing so they pervert the true human rights and freedoms. They actually
only do their job, they cause states opposite to normal ones, so they
misdirect consciousness to the lower centers instead of the higher centers.
They keep doing this to force a man to use the impact of his personal
experience of everything wrong to reach awareness of what is actually
right. In the laws of this world (the category of dialectics – the unity of
opposites) the only way is for the consciousness to manifest itself fully.
Consciousness is unable to manifest itself instigated by an outer source,

outside our being. Consciousness can manifest and actualize itself only by
the assistance of the consciousness itself, and there could be no
consciousness without the experience of existence. Such is the nature of the
consciousness.
THE ENERGETIC CHAKRA
ACTIV ATION
S ince the connection of consciousness with existence is expressed as
energy, as the life energy, prana , but also the strength we put into every
effort and endeavor, this movement of consciousness between levels of
existence, that is chakras , is simultaneously experienced as the energetic
phenomenon. A sudden movement of this energy along chakras is felt as
the thrill full of rapture that overtakes us and lifts upward in the area of
spine when we experience some revelation, when we do something really
good, beautiful and important. The state of energy also affects the state of
consciousness.
Every conscious uplifting into higher understanding and more creative
functioning is followed by the rise in energy. Such greater connection of
consciousness and energy is called ‘positive energy’. The more aware we
are in using the energy, the more positive it becomes. Every decline of
consciousness into lower and conditioned states is usually followed by the
loss and sapping of life energy. It is experienced as ‘the negative energy’. It
is always followed by blackouts. The basic characteristic of positive energy
is the surpassing of mechanical conditioning, it spreads out away from
itself, because the essence of consciousness is the power to recognize that
all is joined into one. The basic characteristic of negative energy is isolation
from the whole, a need to take energy away from other beings or to
exchange it by force due to the lack of consciousness of the unity of
existence, and the omnipresence of energy and consciousness.
The nature of energy in the lower chakras is more Hertzian in its properties.
It means that it is more polarized, linear and more suited for the three-
dimensional world. This reflects on the psyche and makes it even more

polarized, hence, more divided into the seeming opposites and in conflict
with itself and the outside world.
This polarization creates an even bigger tension.
Bigger tension gives an individual mind (ego) bigger illusion of power,
importance and significance. Therefore, when the mind is exposed to the
bigger power of the energy polarization, it interprets it as bigger vitality and
bigger reality. That is why lower chakras have such strong attraction. They
with their own energy polarization give an illusion that they are more
important and more real, it creates bigger identification for the feeble
consciousness, consciousness identifies easier with their reality, full of
conflicts and passion. People find it hard to rise above their habits and
passion. The power of attraction of the lowest psychoenergetic centers,
which are polarized to the maximum, is the cause of all the reincarnations
and the fall of man into the lower states of consciousness, to all the
suffering. All the dualism in man finds its source here, he is chained to his
lower nature, the illusions of the material existence, while at the same time
he can be aware of the consciousness itself and its independence of
everything. He refers to it as his lower and his higher nature.
The energetic chakra rising is easiest to comprehend through the nature of
their frequencies. The first chakra , muladhara , is maximally Hertzian,
while the last chakra , sahasrara , is maximally non-Hertzian. That is why
the first one is maximally polarized into opposites and expresses its nature
most obviously as the pure energy, its impact being material to the greatest
extent. The seventh chakra is for the same reason the most distanced from
the materiality and it is the closest to the unity of opposites. All the
remaining chakras in between merely represent the stages of manifestation
all the way from the pure energy to the pure consciousness. All the chakras
together represent the unity of energy and consciousness, that is the
manifested existence in consciousness and in all possible phases, from the
Hertzian to the non-Hertzian.
In practical life experience it means that the first chakra provides pure life
energy, more accurately, the energy wholeness of our being. It is best
observed in a young being which is energetically whole so much so that it
has the power of complete regeneration. The second chakra functions in

such a manner that the original energy wholeness begins to divide and
polarize, which is expressed as sexuality. From that moment onward the
energy wholeness is achieved and restored through the direct intercourse
with the energy of the opposite sex, polarity. It is also a necessary condition
for creating a new life (conception).
In the act of unity ecstasy appears for a moment which provides the
experience of the original unity of consciousness and existence, the orgasm.
In the third chakra the energy is exchanged with the wider community and
all the other objects and forms of life, which are not connected with the
biological relationship only, like in the second chakra , but it gets extended
to all the life interests where people can join in and share. In this ever wider
concept of sharing and relationships, the energy reaches the point of its
wholeness. In the fourth chakra the energy exchange is maximally
widespread and versatile, it refers to all the objects and forms of existence,
without any differences and limitations in the relationships and contents.
For the first time the Hertzian frequencies of the energy manifestation (the
first three lower chakras ) lose dominance and get equalized with or
transformed into the non-Hertzian ones, more precisely, the physical and
energetic experience of existence transforms into the spiritual and conscious
(the three upper chakras ). This awareness of the energetic unity of
everything we experience as the feeling of love. In that chakra , anahata ,
which is central, a precise measuring and weighing takes place of the
manifested and the unmanifested, of the material and conscious, of the
spiritual, outer and inner. This measuring and finding the right quota and
sense through the energetic experience of comprehending everything, is
emotional maturity, in other words, one's ability to love. Love becomes the
prerequisite for the proper understanding of everything, a condition for
every further awareness. In the end, the final awakening will find its
balance in the proper functioning of this chakra .
The next form of existence with the aim of energetic wholeness refers to the
exchange of experience and information. That is the fifth chakra , vishuddhi
. The next one is the complete cognition and perception of energy as a form
of consciousness that takes place in the sixth chakra , ajna . Energy and
consciousness finally get together here, that is energy, every form of

existence is recognized as consciousness, and consciousness is recognized
as every possible form. Once this is realized the transcendence of form and
consciousness in the seventh chakra , sahasrara , immediately occurs.
This way the existence through all these chakras goes through the rough
physical or the Hertzian state to the more subtle nonphysical or the non-
Hertzian state. Following this pattern, those two states from their ostensible
opposition – which gives the illusion of the manifested world – become one
state of the divine consciousness, the consciousness of the soul.
In order for the energy aspect chakras to be harmonized and thus their
uplifting enabled to the higher states of consciousness, to the higher
chakras , it is necessary to work with chakras from two aspects: the
energetic and the psychological one, that is consciously.
In the system of practice of G. I. Gurdjieff the relationship between energy
and consciousness is expressed in the terms 'work on the being' which refers
to the energy, and 'work on the knowledge' which refers to the
consciousness. It is very important that both of these are well balanced and
even. The work on the being consists of a series of small exercises which
uplift the energy potential of the body. It affects the state of mind. Unless
this work is followed by the work on acquiring knowledge, which brings
the understanding of sense of the entire process, that is the objective
awareness and the understanding what energy really is, what right goals it
should have and its effect on the consciousness, then their balance is off and
it directs the man's development in the wrong way. Likewise, if the work on
acquiring knowledge is not followed by the work on being, the
accumulation and the correct implementation of energy, then such
consciousness will be of no use to anyone, it will remain abstract. It will not
possess sufficient energy to realize its true potential.
The energy work with chakras consists of the right diet and certain
exercises.
The conscious work with chakras consists of strengthening the very
presence of awareness and understanding of functioning and effect it has in
all the states of consciousness, in all the chakras . That is the practice of
meditation.

A good diet is the foundation for the proper operating of all the chakras ,
especially of the lower three. They are more dependent on the quality of
energy, and energy is taken in largely through food. Raw plant food is ideal
for the well balanced functioning of the lower centers. Rougher food
(cooked, non-vegetarian) strengthens the functioning of these chakras and
they are harder to overcome. Due to the lack of consciousness and excess
energy, the functioning of the lower chakras is easier to disturb.
There are multiple exercises for ‘uplifting the energy’ through the chakras ,
the entire hatha yoga is focused on it, and a greater deal of the tantra
practice, they involve imagination ( yantra ) and the sound vibration (
mantra ) in connection with every single chakra .
However, the majority of these exercises are ideologically oriented. For this
reason we will not deal with them because we only put forward the
objective reality in connection with chakras , respectively the unity of
consciousness and existence.
We will suggest only two exercise here that are completely effective and, at
that, more than others, maybe because they are ideologically neutral.
The first one is known as Tibetan Rejuvenation Rites Program which were
gathered and published by Peter Kelder in the work Ancient Secret of the
Fountain of Youth.
The second one is the ‘circulation of light’ taken from the book The Secret
of the Golden Flower , a manual in Tao alchemy translated by Richard
Wilhelm, which will be presented here in somewhat altered form influenced
by the experiences published in Kundalini Tantra by Swami Satyananda
Saraswati.
These books should be studied for the better understanding of this topic.
PHYSICAL EXERCISES
FOR THE HARMONIOUS CHAKRA
ACTIV ATION

T he exercises have been taken from Peter Kelder's book The Fountain of
Youth and are universal and easy for every healthy individual with the goal
of the harmonious chakra activation and maintaining the overall health and
vitality.
The first five exercises, or rites, are done together, one after another. The
sixth one is done separately.
Breathing in the first five exercises is done through the nose every time we
bend backward or lift the body, and breathing out is done through the mouth
when we put down the legs or the body.
The first five exercises activate all the chakras and uplift the energy in the
body. They are done on a daily basis every morning and evening, with a
twelve-hour time span. Beginners should start with three repetitions of each
exercise, and gradually increase the performance to an odd number only,
until they reach twenty-one. From that moment onward they do all the

elements 21 times all together, the best option would be for the rest of one's
life. The first exercise is done by spinning round, till we reach the 21 turns.
The sixth exercise serves only to lift the energy accumulated in the lower
chakras upward to the higher chakras . Specifically the sexual energy. This
exercise is done only when we have excess sexual energy and we wish to
redirect it upward. The first five exercises greatly enhance the energy
potential in the body, and together with the sexual energy also, which is the
proof that these exercises work. If there is no excess sexual energy this
exercise is of no use. It is also of no use if the person is not mature enough
to redirect the sexual energy from the lower to the higher chakras . It should
also be stressed that the first five exercises are incomplete without the sixth.
The sixth exercise consists of breathing only. In the body position under
number 1. we exhale through the mouth all the air from the lungs, and at the
same time bend until we get to position 2. in the picture, with the empty
lungs. Then, with such empty lungs, return to a straight up posture 3. put
your hands on your hips and so we stay as far as we can with the empty
lungs. When we can no longer stand, we just let our hands on the side as in
figure 4. and let the air fall into the lungs through the nose. It should be
evenly breathed a few times until the breathing returns to normal. This
exercise should be repeated several times.
This exercise is a powerful tool for the transformation of sexual energy to
the higher centers. It acts as the vacuum pump and instantly releases the
unnecessary sexual tension. With its simplicity the futile attempts made by
monks and 'spiritual' people to restrain their sexual energy seem comical,
done often in terms of suppressing sexuality that later backfires in many
deviant ways, often pseudo religious. Actually, the highest percentage of
pseudo religiousness is spiked with the poison of the suppressed sexuality.
The energy is always one and the same. The same energy generates
sexuality and mind. It is only a question of what level of consciousness (
chakra ) it operates from. One would do well to get acquainted with it first,
to get to know its ways of functioning and afterward to redirect it to the
higher centers.

Without getting to know it and fully comprehending the way it functions it
is not possible to redirect the energy from the lower to the higher centers.
Comprehending itself is in essence what redirects and improves the ways of
functioning, and expressing energy. Comprehension is awareness, and
energy always follows the awareness, like the shadow of the traveler
follows the light.
THE EXERCISE OF IMAGINATION
AND BREATHING FOR THE CHAKRA
ACTIV ATION
A part from these exercises for the complete work with chakras only one
additional exercise is required.
Firstly, one should become aware of the positions of all seven chakras in
the body and their colors. After that, with the inhaling of the air through the
nose one should visualize white light in the form of a stream that moves in
the upward direction from the first chakra and onto the second one; as
though the inhaling itself lifts and sucks in the light energy from the first to
the second chakra ; then one should exhale through the mouth. As one
breathes the air for the second time they should visualize the white stream
of light energy lifting from the second chakra to the third. Exhale. Then do
the same from the third to the fourth, from the fourth to the fifth; from the
fifth to the sixth chakra , and finally from the sixth to the seventh.
With every inhaling we take we lift the light stream of energy one chakra
up. Once we reach the seventh chakra , we visualize white light, together
with the long breathing out, that goes down like a shower, around the whole
body, from the seventh chakra down to the first, where it keeps gathering
again and we repeat the cycle of seven inhalations and seven upliftings of
the white energy stream, from one chakra to another. This could be called
the circulation of light. We finish after the third time round, and the third
cycle we finalize by lowering the light, not to the first chakra as before, but
only to the heart. The whole exercise is done three times after which the
light energy is settled in the heart.

This can be done after the previously described exercises for chakra
activation, and it can be done totally independent of them, whenever
possible, minimum once a day.
THE PRINCIPLE OF ENERGY
PRESERV ATION
FOR THE UPLIFTING OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
T he most important factor in raising awareness of all chakras and
attaining samadhi is the preservation of energy in the body. This is so
because energy is the physical reflection of consciousness, what the
consciousness does in existence, energy is the power of the consciousness
to act in the body and existence, consciousness is intention or purpose
energy acts in accordance with. Therefore, energy and consciousness are
two aspects of the same thing, one somewhat rougher and one more subtle.
For the strengthening of the presence of consciousness in the body it is
necessary to strengthen the presence of energy. In other words it means: it is
necessary to preserve the energy wholeness of the first chakra in all other
chakras, that is, in the various ways of existence and the states of
consciousness. It is necessary because when every chakra functions with its
full energy potential, then the consciousness through every chakra realizes
its full potential.
The most basic form of energy exchange in the body is sexual energy. The
carriers of that energy are sexual cells. Therefore, in order for the energy to
preserve in the body to its fullest potential it is necessary to preserve the
sexual cells. The sexual cells are created with the joint effort of all the
glands of the endocrine system. It means all the chakras participate in their
creation. That is why whenever we lose sexual cells through sexuality that
does not have a purpose of creating a new life, we lose the potential of all
the chakras . It is of key importance that we preserve sexual cells to be able
to uplift the consciousness easier to the highest chakra . When they are not

secreted but remain in the body, the sexual cells are absorbed by blood and
then enhance the performance of neurotransmitters in the brain, thus
boosting perception. People who abstinate know that they have better
memory, concentration and even the ability of extrasensory perception.
All it takes is for the energy to be preserved whose carriers in the body are
the sexual cells. It will naturally grow from the lower to the higher centers
all the way to the top, to the seventh chakra . It resembles filling up a jar
with water all the way to the top. It we have a tiny hole at the bottom that
constantly keeps dripping water we will never be able to fill it up. In the
similar fashion one should prevent the energy sapping through the lower
chakras in order to fill themselves to the top. We lose energy through the
malfunctioning of centers and negativity. More accurately put, negativity is
the obvious outcome of the malfunctioning of the psychoenergetic centers.
Preventing energy draining away from us is possible only with the proper
functioning of the lower chakras , by getting fully consciously acquainted
with the way they operate, with understanding of the process. A further help
may be found in the previously explained exercises.
The preservation of the sexual cells, the sexual energy, and its redirecting to
the higher centres, the science of tantra emphasizes as the primary goal in
the practice of awakening or enlightenment. To avoid the dangerous and
harmful suppressing of the sexual energy, tantra teaches us that it is
achieved by raising awareness of the sexuality itself, through intercourse,
but without the ejaculation and orgasmic energy discharge. By doing so the
entire act is transferred upward into the higher, heart chakra , anahata , the
sex itself is surpassed and the real love making is experienced. The fourth,
heart chakra , is the cognition of the energy essence of the existence, and
when consciousness and energy combine it is experienced as love making,
since energy binds everything and love always strives to be in the unity
with the loved one.
One should make love with the purpose of experiencing the other being in
the most profound way, and not for the sake of using it to satisfy one's own
desires. You make love with the very touch and look, and above all, through
the mutual understanding, in common feelings and joint cognition - to the
whole existence, not just to one body. With the whole being, in all aspects

of life, and not just the sexual organs. That is why love always gives, and
asks nothing in return. Making love means enjoying in the consciousness of
the soul together with the other soul; enjoying together in the consciousness
of existence. The result of such love making is not a sudden and short-lived
discharge and ecstasy like in a normal intercourse, but a permanent ecstasy
of the deepest fulfillment with the knowing, the understanding and finding
sense of it all, and that means love. And energy. If we preserve the sexual
cells that propagate a new life, they will fertilize ourselves, they will fill us
with the perpetual bliss, with the permanent orgasm. And it will rejuvenate
our body.
The experience of orgasm is nothing but a short-lived experience of the
bliss of the complete merging of consciousness and existence, samadhi .
That is why orgasm is so appealing. If we preserve our energy, we will be in
such a state forever.
Actually, the proper functioning of every chakra , and all the chakras
together, does not depend on anything else but on the balance of energy and
consciousness in every chakra . It means that it depends on the balance and
unity of our thoughts and deeds, consciousness and will, knowledge and
work. Besides, that is why chakras exist in the first place, to link
consciousness and existence through our being.
The connection of energy and consciousness is clear in itself due to the very
nature of energy and consciousness. Energy means a being in movement
and action, and consciousness always expresses itself as being, as the
existence. Therefore, one without the other is not an option.
Our body is a microcosm. Everything that is in cosmos, is compressed in
the body, as well. Energy is everything that takes place in the cosmos and
everything that could be, therefore, energy is the compressed event of
everything that can possibly happen. We have already stated that thought is
information for further shaping, that thought and shape co-exist in parallel
and that they are one and the same thing although they appear to be separate
due to the different dimension of the reality they occupy, so on the outside
we have a form, and within us we have the thought of the form. The same
works for energy and an event: the energy is the finest expression of an
event, it is potential (information) for any possible future outcome, no event

can ever take place without the energy. What happens in the outside world,
also happens within us in the form of pure energy . What information is to
shaping, the energy is the same to happening. Energy is the most subtle
form of happening, information for events of an event.
All events find their endpoint in the consciousness, in the knowing of the
sense of an event. Therefore, in order for us to reach the highest
consciousness, to the endpoint of all the happening, any potential event we
must experience within us first, as the microcosm, we must beat all the
temptations of the lower chakras in our body, all the lower states of
consciousness and happening. We achieve this by keeping and condensing
within ourselves the potential of all the possible events, in their original
information form, as energy, to preserve and compress ourselves. That is
how we raise awareness of the happening within us. That is the true
meaning of preserving and uplifting the energy along the chakras for the
sake of consciousness. By preserving energy within us, we keep all the
possibilities in their most original information form. Therefore, the more
energy we have, the more awareness we possess. To be the most aware we
must provide all the potential of being and existence (energy) in ourselves
firstly. If we do not have energy, we do not have potential of all the possible
events in ourselves, in the body, and therefore we will have nothing to raise
awareness of because there is nothing to raise awareness of. That is why
consciousness is always there where there is energy.
We must never project awareness on to the outside. Everything gets
resolved within us. Due to the omnipresent energy, the unitying of the
consciousness and existence through chakras , only what we become in our
system aware of, what we comprehend, overcome and surpass within us, we
will be able to raise the awareness of, comprehend, overcome and surpass
in the outside world, as well. It never goes the other way round. Existence
does not reach the awareness of itself, of the meaning of the phenomena in
some stone or an animal, but has instead created our body, with all the
chakras , as the most suitable place where it would reach the final
awareness of itself. That is why in our body all the potential of our
existence – energy – has to exist in order for all the potential of the
consciousness to be expressed. That is why they are both in the final
outcome one and the same thing.

BASIC PRINCIPLES OF UPLIFTING
THE CONSCIOUSNESS THROUGH
CHAKRAS
C onsciousness as the source of existence is present everywhere, in all the
chakras , even chakras as the psycho-energy centers exist to enable the
actualization the consciousness in a certain way. The way of actualization or
functioning of the consciousness in the world, or being, is a certain chakra .
Therefore, the presence of consciousness in a certain chakra relates to the
manner in which we exist and act. All we have to do is actualize the
consciousness, and not to bring it into a certain chakra . It is already there,
as the very foundation of life, the only question which remains is what to do
with it.
Therefore, when we say that we should activate a certain chakra , what is
usually meant by that is that we should act in accordance with the level of
the consciousness corresponding with the characteristics of that chakra .
Every higher chakra is activated by raising awareness of the functioning of
the lower chakra .
In order for the consciousness to be taken to higher levels nothing much
should be done besides harmonizing the functioning of every single chakra
to do the job it was designed to do, and not to meddle with the functioning
of the other ones, so that the functioning of the psycho-energy centers
remains unperturbed. All the drama of human life and all the adversity can
be brought down to mere disruption in the functioning of the centers, or
chakras . Nothing else.
An example of the malfunctioning of the centers is simple. If the
functioning of the second chakra , sexuality, is disrupted with the
functioning of the third chakra , which brings expressing your will, and
when imagination of the higher centers is added, combined with the
strength of the first chakra which adds the power of raw energy which is
self-sufficient, then the result is deviant sexual conduct, or the mind is

burdened with inferior behavior, with sexuality and materialism. The
functioning of every chakra is right only when it is restricted to the
functioning in accordance with its own level. Sexuality is right only when it
serves its purpose, but when it is mixed with the other centers it disrupts the
functioning of both sexuality and other centers. There is nothing wrong in
the functioning of any chakra . The wrong is what happens when their
functioning is disrupted and when they do not perform the task they were
originally designed to perform.
In every single chakra there are two parts, one lower and one higher, the
mechanical and the conscious part, and our task is to enhance the presence
of the consciousness in the conscious part, which is done by the awakening
of the lower, the mechanical functioning of that specific chakra .
Therefore, everything can be boiled down to the awakening and
understanding. That is the only thing that can lead us to the higher states of
existence. Consequently, the awakening and understanding which is in
harmony with our functioning (energy) is all it takes. This bond is necessary
because neither the correct functioning is possible without the
consciousness, nor is the correct consciousness in existence possible
without the proper conduct. Let us remind ourselves that energy means
action.
However, when we speak of the consciousness we primarily refer to its
quantum field and the non-Hertzian nature of existence. It practically means
that while uplifting the consciousness and energy into the higher chakras
the non-Hertzian properties should be enhanced. What properties would
those be? The timeless presence here and now that comes as a consequence
of the independence of consciousness from the contents of the mind; the
state of infinite present as the only reality; there is nothing intended that
needs to take place in the future, but rather that is already realized here and
now; the feeling that we do not move around in space but the space moves
around us; there is not a significant difference between what is without and
what is within, that the outside world is merely a reflection of the
consciousness in us, that synchronicity points out and proves the merging of
consciousness and the phenomena. Therefore, the non-Hertzian state of
consciousness connects us to the universal quantum field where everything

is ever present in a timeless and subtle kind of way, including the fullest
potential of every single chakra .
The Hertzian properties belong to the mechanical functioning of every
chakra , also the mechanical and conditional functioning in general. Above
all, the linear time and causality based on it, as well. The non-Hertzian
properties of every chakra belong to the consciousness and the conscious
functioning, independent and free, and always omnipresent.
The practice of meditation is the only practice of strengthening the non-
Hertzian consciousness of the quantum field.
When we refer to the idea of meditation what we actually mean is the pure
practice of the transcendence of mind (mental stillness) which is a part of
the practice of early Buddhism (dhyana), in zen Buddhism ( za zen, shikan
taza ), which is described in the opening chapters of the Yoga Sutras by
Patanjali.
The basic non-Hertzian property of the quantum field is being static and
self-sufficient, complete. On our physical plain it is the stillness of the being
which produces the feeling of perfect completion and realization, the bliss
of finding oneself and one own’s essence. When our being is completely
still when we sit throughout the meditative process, from the most rough
physical motion, to the finest mental stillness, we adjust ourselves to the
stationary, non-Hertzian, universal quantum field. That is why meditation is
the direct path to the non-Hertzian, quantum consciousness, that is the very
source of existence.
The strengthening of the non-Hertzian state of consciousness refers as much
to the mental stillness as much it refers to the energetic adjusting. Because
energy is the being in motion and action, the consciousness is in motion and
action. Hence, there is nothing we can do with consciousness unless it is
followed with energy, with action, with the way we use our life energy. We
must bring energy into the non-Hertzian state of vibrations. We do this by
understanding the nature of our actions on the energy level, what we do and
why, with the conscious awareness of our actions. By raising awareness of
every movement of our being, from awareness breathing to the smallest
movement we are doing, we bring our energy in harmony with the

consciousness, we become aware of it and by doing so we translate it to the
non-Hertzian state. In Buddhism this practice is called vipassana and
satipatthana .
Such awareness is systematically being conducted onto all the dimensions
of our existence: on the physical body (earth), in the feelings and emotions
(water); by expressing will and intention (fire) and becoming aware of the
mind itself and thoughts (air). Only such a practice is complete. Only it can
connect all the states of consciousness into the seventh condition, the
seventh chakra sahasrara , into the samadhi , into the unity of
consciousness and existence.
All of it is possible only due to this unity being already in existence and
everything else builds on this existence. Everything we do in this world in
all our lives is rediscovering this unity. The divine consciousness is the only
reality and nothing can exist outside of it. We can merely manifest it
completely and individually in samadhi , in us and through us; in samadhi
we unite the divine consciousness that enables everything with itself in
itself, by uniting our individual consciousness with the divine
consciousness.
If they were not already in unity, their ostensible unity could never happen
to us.
To make it happen man should just strengthen the non-Hertzian state of
consciousness, the timeless presence of here and now. The energy of the
quantum field will be able to manifest itself through such an awakened
individual giving him/her limitless supply of the omnipresent energy that is
based on the non-Hertzian waves discovered by Nikola Tesla.
What is the practical aspect of consciousness and energy being uplifted
along the chakras ? That is the key question of those who practice
spirituality. The answer is simple and we have already given it: every higher
chakra is activated by raising the awareness of the lower chakra .
This process has a natural tendency to realize itself fully, and if it does not
do so it is due to our mind/ego disruptions to the whole system. These
disruptions takes place continually. All our lives are based on these

disruptions. Consciousness tests all the possibilities, which means all the
mistakes, as well. If the unitying of existence and consciousness were
happening along a straight line all at once, no faltering and no decline,
consciousness would be unable to integrate itself with all the aspects and
the possibilities of existence, there would be nothing to become aware of. It
is the very oscillations, rising and falling, that give the necessary friction
that charges the energy and makes it express itself in an endless variety of
ways, to make consciousness strengthen its presence in all the states of
being and existence. This is the only way for it to grow in the upward
manner along the chakras .
Come what may, chakras are already doing their job. Our task is just to be
aware of their performance in our mind and by doing so actualize it in our
existence. Therefore, it can be said that chakra activation is actually making
the mind aware of their functioning. Once it happens, the functioning of
chakras will embrace our whole being, both the conscious and the
unconscious part.
How does this awareness of the chakra functioning look like in our
experience? All chakras work together and it is hard in life to tell their
functioning apart, although there are general rules of thumb for every
chakra . All chakras are in an interconnected chain of functioning. This
chain has a positive impact and chakras express themselves properly only if
the lower one is tied in its functioning to the higher one. If some chakra is
closed off and limited to its functions only, and perhaps tied to the lower
chakra , then its functioning is negative.
***
The first chakra gives life energy to the whole body and all the other
chakras . As such it is neutral. It is successfully realized through the second
chakra , where energy gets polarized and this polarization is expressed
through sexuality. More accurately put, the polarized energy must
exchange, it must circulate through man and woman. For this reason,
human beings exist as two sexes, man and woman. Sex is nothing but the
exchange of energy between sexes. Therefore, through sex new life is born
and our energy status very much depends on what we do with our energy
through sexuality. When the first chakra gets successfully expressed

through the second chakra , the life energy then (the energy of the first
chakra ) successfully expresses itself through all the activities in connection
with the simple energy exchange through the physical contact with all the
objects, with the opposite sex, with other beings and situations (fun, games,
all kinds of physical contacts and relationships, and aggressiveness within
the normal boundaries). With the correct exchange of energy, its adequate
polarization, our body is healthy and vital.
Without the real connection to the higher chakras life energy from the first
chakra becomes the opposition to life, such man must take life energy by
force from other beings, and he does so in a number of twisted ways. All
abnormal ways of taking the life energy, from murder to abuse and energy
vampirism in any form, are the direct result of the first energy block and the
lack of any real connection with the higher centers and consciousness of the
soul.
***
The second chakra is properly actualized through the third chakra , when
we focus the energy to a certain higher goal and purpose, during the
exchange of energy with another being or community on the whole, and the
joint interests of the community we share same time and space with. If we
exchange our energy with the opposite sex and aim it for some higher
purpose, such as offspring or realization of some higher goals and ideals,
then we have successfully activated the third chakra . The nature of one
chakra reaches its full potential only when it is dedicated to higher
psychoenergy centers. This is true for sexuality also, it is the source of the
biggest joy only if it is aimed for a higher purpose, if it does not serve itself
only, and especially if it not aimed at a lower center. It becomes destructive
then. One form of destructiveness is when the energy in the second chakra
is not exchanged with the opposite sex, but is done with the same sex (or
worse yet – with something else). Then the circulation of energy between
the sexes does not take place together with the healing which takes the
energy to the higher centers, but it gets blocked in the second chakra .
Homosexuality (together with all the other sexual perversions) is
energetically wrong, it is just blocked energy in the second chakra .

When the first three chakras are successfully connected and activated they
conduct the energy in a good way, within every man and in interpersonal
relationships. When sexuality is good, the flow of energy from the first to
the third chakra is good. Some disturbance of sexuality (second chakra ) is
largely the cause of all the other disturbances (the first chakra : the
psychophysical health; and third chakra : social life and life goals), as well
as all the other disturbances causing problems for sexuality.
Without the real connection of the second chakra with the third, energy in
the second chakra remains locked and self-sufficient in its most basic form
between the sexes, but that way it becomes destructive, namely, due to the
lack of higher consciousness, and neutral first chakra where all the energy
comes from and possessing the only bond with, the second chakra can find
its energy exchange in all sorts of things, not just in the opposite sex of the
same biological species. The energy exchange can be done with any object.
This is how all the perversions and obsessions (fetishism) are brought
about, and consequently all the unhealthy interpersonal relationships.
***
In order to successfully actualize the third chakra we should connect it with
the fourth chakra . It means that our basic goals and aspirations rest on love
and understanding. The fourth chakra is consciousness of the omnipresent
energy, because it does not refer only to our body (the first two chakras )
nor the environment and the society (third chakra ) but to the existence in
general. The awareness that we are one with the entire existence is love.
That is why we can love everything, a certain being and a certain thing,
place, music, book, plant, animal ... even that what is not recommended to
be loved.
In order to realize the third chakra successfully, for example through
children and family, it will not do without the realized fourth chakra ,
without the omnipresent love and emotional maturity. The realization of the
third chakra , the fulfillment of some life goal, or the birth of a child,
connects us to the omnipresent energy, with the entire existence through the
fourth chakra . Namely, when we have completely become aware of what it
was were striving for through the third chakra , for example, the birth of a
child, we recognize in that the unconditional love of the divine

consciousness. When we become aware of what a child is in its essence,
and it is so easy to see the consciousness of the soul because it is so near its
face and its look, the surface of its being (especially when it is sleeping),
then we become aware of the omnipresence of life energy in everything, in
the existence itself, and that brings the activation of the fourth chakra . The
same applies for any other achievement, when we become aware of the
essence of all human aspirations (third chakra ) we become aware of the
fact that they all are mere manifestations of the creative intelligence of the
divine consciousness in the existence itself.
When the third chakra is not connected with the higher fourth chakra ,
when it is closed within and tied only to the lower chakras , the first and the
second one, then the abnormal manifestation of power occurs together with
all the wrong goals, the dictatorship of one-mindedness, in the man himself,
in the family or the society on the whole. The goals that are not based on
understanding and love are generated here, the goals that are justified with
'aim justifies the means', where the means are no longer chosen because
there is no connection with the higher centers and consciousness of the soul.
Such people walk all over everyone without mercy on their path to their
lower goals.
***
By connecting the first three chakras with the fourth the functioning of the
instinctive or motoric center is realized in a positive and a creative way.
In order for the first three chakras to function properly, and to remain
interconnected in a good way, it is necessary for them to be connected with
the fourth chakra . Without this bond their functioning is off and out of
tune, which results in a twisted life. When they are connected with the
fourth chakra such people enjoy the biggest happiness in both their private
and their social life. When they are not connected with the fourth chakra ,
then such life is very often the cause of suffering for an individual and for
the society, as well.
***

When the forth chakra is successfully connected with the first three lower
chakras , that is when the first three chakras have successfully connected
and realized themselves in relation to the fourth, then the fourth chakra can
connect with the fifth one and successfully realize itself and all the lower
chakras .
Connecting the fourth chakra with the fifth refers to the expressing of the
unconditional love and emotional understanding of the nature of the very
existence through thought, words and deeds. Our understanding does not
mean much if we cannot express it. Love is also not love if we do not
express it. When we express it we show the power of understanding.
Expressing is the characteristic of the fifth chakra . During expressing all
the weaknesses and all the virtues of our understanding are displayed
together with our emotional maturity.
***
The proper expression is not an option unless it is based on the correct
perception and insight. It means that the functioning of the fifth chakra ,
vishuddhi , is realized completely when it is connected with the sixth, ajna
chakra . Perception is not right either if it is not expressed.
***
Man differs from all other beings in possessing perception independent of
space and time, it surpasses the sensory perception. Man's perception is
such because it is not based on the body and senses but on the pure
consciousness of the soul with which he has contact with his higher mind,
which is not in the body and therefore, it is not limited by the sensory
perception. Man's higher mind is presented with the chakra sahasrara . To
make sure that man's perception is real and complete, the sixth chakra ajna
must be connected with the seventh, with sahasrara .
The only true perception and cognition man can receive from his higher
mind that connects him with the consciousness of the soul. To the degree
the perception and cognition do not come from the higher mind and the
consciousness of the soul, to that degree the perception and cognition are

wrong. The more our bond with the consciousness of the soul is clean and
straightforward, the more our cognition is true and complete.
***
The seventh chakra , sahasrara , is always connected with the
consciousness of the transcendental soul, with the divine consciousness that
enables everything. It is placed above the head, which indicates that is
independent of the body and mind. It does not depend on anything. It
practically means that the divine consciousness is always with us although
we do not detect it due to the identification with the body and mind. The
seventh chakra cannot be activated, we can just disrupt the functioning of
the lower chakras and by doing so deprive ourselves of all the blessings of
the seventh chakra . The seventh chakra actualizes itself with the proper
functioning of all the remaining chakras .
***
There is one general and very effective principle that uplifts the
consciousness and energy toward the psychoenergetic centers or chakras .
According to the testimony of people who have become aware of their
existence between two lives in a hypnotic regression, and those who
experienced near death experience, and for a fraction of time were able to
perceive their entire past life, and then had the ability to recapitulate
everything they did, especially what they did to other people. At the same
time they were able to experience how the others felt about their actions
toward them. They were able to experience their deeds both ways,
subjectively and objectively. This happens due to the holographic nature of
existence, everything is One in the divine consciousness, everything gets
reflected in everything. Based on such an awareness the soul decides when
and where it will be born to continue its growth and correct its mistakes.
This awareness, of how the others experienced our actions, is the key
principle that leads us to maturity during the course of our lives. Its
significance is so big that souls brought it into this world in their memory
and set it as the foundation of the ethical principle, which says (do not) do
unto others what you (do not) wish to be done unto yourself.

This fundamental principle of self-development works with the uplifting of
the consciousness through chakras . If the negative functioning of some
chakra relates to our conduct in relation to other people (negativity always
stops consciousness on a certain level and lowers it to the lower
frequencies), then the objective consciousness of how the others feel about
it will pull us to a higher level, the higher chakra . When the consciousness
in us is mature enough and we begin to realize how the others feel toward
our actions regarding them, and they are in connection with some chakra ,
the state of consciousness, then we automatically uplift ourselves into
higher understanding, to the higher chakra or higher state of consciousness.
The negative functioning refers to the first three chakras , the exchange of
energy in its most elementary form (the first one), by means of sexuality
(the second one) and will power (the third chakra ).
If the negative functioning of some chakra relates to the activities that are
in no way connected with people, but with some of our personal habits and
ways, the identical objective awareness toward ourselves will give us
insight into how our being functions (as though our own deed is from some
different or previous case), and to what an extent it stunts our karmic
maturity in the context of our entire life. Indeed, when we look at a negative
trait we possess in the context of our entire life and death, we leave any
attachment we may have and surpass it.
The starting moment of the maturity of objective awareness of oneself, and
about the malfunctioning of the lower chakras , Buddha described in words
“There is too much disgust”.
Objective awareness uplifts the energy and existence into the higher levels.
Nothing else. Whenever we are objectively aware of something within us or
outside of ourselves, we surpass it. The objective here means opposite of
subjective, restricted in any way. Objective consciousness means awareness
of the objective reality.
The state of enlightenment or samadhi in the highest chakra , sahasrara , is
exactly the type of state of the most objective awareness. It is the
consciousness of our soul which we will have after the physical life of ours,
when we go back to our original, authentic state ( svarupa ). It is therefore

called 'the great samadhi' , or maha - samadhi . The purpose of our
awareness is to possess the consciousness of our soul irrelevant of the body
and mind, before and after life in this world, to try to have it during our
lifetime here and now, while we are in the body and mind. Always. Because
it is timeless.
It is achieved with the disappearance of all the illusions we have of the
body and mind, to think that we exist in space and time as separate entities,
that we differ from the divine absolute who is everything that is.
SAMADHI
THE UNITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS
AND EXISTENCE
A ccording to the Biblical story God created the world in six days, and
rested on the seventh. This story is actually about the chakras . Everything
manifests itself through the seven chakras , and the seventh is the pure
divine consciousness of itself. Six chakras represent all forms of existence,
the seventh one is their transcendence. In the human experience the
transcendence is the most profound cognition, completely objective
awareness, but unlike all other states of lower consciousness, transcendence
is not based on any activity or the contents of the consciousness, it is the
total surrender, which Buddha so adequately described as 'the ceasing' or
'extinction' ( nirvana ).
It is logical because the consciousness of unity is the consciousness of the
quantum field from which and in which everything already exists
timelessly. We experience here only individual manifestations of all the
potentials of the quantum field in the illusion of space and time. The return
into it is, therefore, possible only through surrender, the ceasing and
extinction of all the illusions. This coming back is also an illusion because
from this divine consciousness which is the whole we were never able to
get out, it is everything and it is ourselves; it is the source of our
consciousness. It is one more reason why you get into it with the surrender

only. Chan Buddhists express these in words: when the mind is still the
wrong viewpoints disappear all by themselves.
In order for the surrender to be possible it is necessary to overcome all the
illusions; in order for the illusions to be overcome it takes the most
powerful potential of pure consciousness combined with the highest
potential of energy, that is the impact of consciousness.
The relation between consciousness and its effect (energy, prana ) is
depicted in the classical yoga as the two paths and their trajectory, the ida
and pingala , that start at the first chakra , cross their paths and entwine
around every single chakra on their way to the sixth chakra ( ajna ) where
they join once again to enable the consciousness of unity of the seventh
chakra . Ida and pingala actually represent the polarization of energy based
on which it works. The polarization of energy is actually the polarization
into the consciousness and action. The consciousness is non-Hertzian and
action is the Hertzian frequency.
The entwining of trajectory of the consciousness and energy on its path
around every chakra points to the fact that the the full awareness of the
potential of every chakra is necessary, of every level of consciousness, of
all the possible states and experiences of existence to balance the objective
consciousness which is represented with the central trajectory, sushumna ,
which is between the ida and pingala and joins the first to the seventh
chakra . Sushumna actually represents the balance of consciousness and
energy, of ida and pingala , it connects the consciousness and existence
with all the chakras , with all the states of consciousness, with all the
possibilities of existence. [12]

Therefore, it is very important to emphasize once more the significance of
unity of consciousness and energy, the unity of thoughts and deeds,
awareness and the whole life. In the traditional graphic display of ida and
pingala it is clearly visible that they cross and join in every chakra , which
points to the merging of energy (being) and consciousness in every chakra .
The very joining of consciousness and energy activates every chakra in the
right way and keeps uplifting us up to the final awakening or realization,
the seventh chakra .
Every chakra is unrealized only because of the lack of unity of
consciousness and being, which is energy, of their imbalance. The lack of
unity and balance of our consciousness and actions, energy, consciousness
and being, is the only factor that traps us in the lower states of existence, the
only source of negativity and suffering. Always when it is pointed to the
positivity or the positive energy that uplifts us, it is stressed that the key
factor is the unity of our deeds or energy with consciousness, their balance
and harmony. This unity is simply realized by doing whatever we are doing
with our whole being, even the most trivial ones, here and now, and to be
objectively aware of everything we do, as a witness. It is the non-Hertzian
principle of consciousness. This principle, as the unity of energy and
consciousness, of ida and pingala , in sushumna , was expressed in words
long ago “be what you are”, “be here and now”, and “awaken yourself”.

The very presence of consciousness is a factor that harmonizes all the
oppositions. The very presence of the consciousness has a natural tendency
to become one with existence, because it never is completely separate from
the existence, consciousness is the source of existence. Therefore, one
should not do anything in order to realize the supreme alertness, the seventh
chakra , apart from being objective, unbiased and aware of every deed, as a
witness. Being aware of the body and everything we do with the body,
being aware of the feelings and everything we feel in any way we feel,
being aware of expressing one's will or intention, and being aware of the
thoughts themselves. It means being aware of the functioning of all the
chakras , all the states of consciousness, in all the dimensions we are
comprised of and in which we exist. This way the consciousness itself is the
factor that awakens and realizes us.
Besides, enlightenment is nothing but enhancing the consciousness. It is
because existence is nothing but the emanation of the consciousness itself.
Together they realize and unite with their sheer presence. The only thing
that should not be done is to separate them. However, the illusion of this
separation is everything that we experience as life, all the world we see, all
the suffering we go through. For that reason it is said that life is just a
dream, that world is just an illusion. What we mean by that is world is an
illusion if we perceive it as a collection of relative objects, but it is real as
the absolute divine consciousness. Consciousness and existence are one,
one absolute divine awareness of itself, it is all that there is and nothing else
could be nor is it a possibility.
This illusion of their separation takes place, however. Why? The answer is
that this illusion is the way in which consciousness and existence exist as
one, and this way it is experiencing absolutely all the potentials of existence
and states of consciousness in their aspiration toward the transcendence.
Everything exists through transcendence, through surpassing, both
consciousness and the existence itself are nothing but one gigantic process
of gradual surpassing. It gets expressed through chakras in a manner where
every single one expresses a lower or a higher state of consciousness and
existence, one act of higher transcendence.

In the first chakra the divine consciousness only exists, without mind, in the
minimal state of consciousness. It is pure existence there which is expressed
through the form of minerals and the combination of elements.
In the second chakra the divine consciousness exists but in an unconscious
state, like in a deep sleep without dreams, it is such in plants. It feels but it
does not have objective awareness of the real nature of what it feels, of
itself as the subject of feelings. Plants feel everything, even our thoughts
and our feelings, but it does not make them develop any higher
consciousness and sense, they only establish, simply witness based on the
rudimentary polarization of the experience of existence. Consciousness and
existence begin to polarize there.
In the third chakra the divine consciousness realizes polarization in all the
possible ways and that is why it can occasionally awaken and it is aware of
the nature of events, it can move and react, but it is insufficiently aware of
the meaning, of the subject who is aware, it cannot comprehend and
connect the role of the subject in the objective phenomena, neither can it be
inspired to start some creative work. It is the world of animals.
In the fourth chakra the divine consciousness for the first time in existence
fully develops the consciousness of the meaning of events, and of the
subject who is aware. Actually, it is not possible to be objectively aware of
the meaning of events without the consciousness of the subject that is
aware. Therefore, they always must go together. The more it goes hand in
hand, the more we are objectively aware of ourselves as the subject in the
objective chain of events and existence, and we can constructively affect the
further phenomena and alter it to a certain degree with our creative
endeavor. It is man and the world of people. Here the first occasional
awakening takes place of the divine consciousness of itself, of the
transcendental awareness.
In the fifth chakra the divine consciousness acquires permanent experiences
of presence of its transcendental awareness in existence, or from the point
of human perspective, man acquires permanent experience of presence in
the divine transcendental consciousness. It is enabled by expressing
consciousness of the divine presence in existence (the fourth chakra ), by
exchange of information of the existence (the fifth chakra ).

In the sixth chakra the divine consciousness for the first time directly
expresses in existence. The divine consciousness is what a man, through
ajna chakra , gives the objective knowing and the complete perception. The
complete perception of the manifested world is possible only through the
complete perception of the subject who is aware of the consciousness as
such. Here the objective consciousness that enables the existence itself for
the first time recognizes itself as the consciousness of the subject, as self-
consciousness.
In ajna chakra the consciousness that enables the very existence for the first
time becomes awareness of itself, through man. In ajna chakra ida and
pingala join completely, the energy and consciousness, existence is seen as
conscious, consciousness is experienced as a form of existence. And the
reverse: man's awareness of himself (Self, atman ) is in ajna the divine
consciousness of itself that is aware of the objective existence. It is called
savikalpa samadhi in the Patanjali's science of yoga , or the consciousness
of unity which is not completely clean, but is seasoned with 'the seed' of the
experience of existence. When the consciousness of itself becomes pure -
meaning perfect, it becomes transcendental, nirvikalpa samadhi ,
completely independent of the experience of existence, untainted by the
illusion of existence.
We have stated that the existence itself rests on consciousness, the overall
existence is in its essence the divine consciousness itself with the awareness
of itself. In the pure awareness of itself, in the seventh chakra , sahasrara ,
there are no illusions of existence, no projections. Every form of existence
from its perspective is a fall of consciousness into some form of the illusion
of existence. Every lower chakra , below sahasrara , represents an even
bigger form of polarization, a greater loss of awareness of oneself, a greater
loss of the absolute balance of opposites, down to the lowest chakra where
the principle of opposites exists all by itself as the principle of pure energy.
In the first chakra is the pure energy of existence, existence itself is pure
energy. In the seventh chakra is pure consciousness of existence, more
precisely, the existence is pure consciousness. All the chakras are the
process of their unitying and separating, basically, understanding of all the
possible states of consciousness and existence.

The first chakra is the furthermost Hertzian state, seventh chakra is the
furthermost non-Hertzian state.
In order for the existence to realize itself completely, consciousness should
crystallize in the existence in its original non-Hertzian condition, the pure
awareness of oneself should be united with all the possible experiences of
existence, and with all the potentials of existence. The science of tantra and
alchemy have done this in all the forms since antiquity, with more or less
success. From this esoteric science originated the exoteric science which is
known to us today and which built this civilization. All material culture and
science are nothing but a reflection of merging the consciousness and
existence through man, more accurately, with man's ability to unite
consciousness and energy, work and action in this world. The entire human
evolution and history are based on this.
Human evolution and history finalize and realize in samadhi , in the unity
of consciousness and existence. Man begins to exist as the one who is, as
the consciousness of the divine soul in all the shapes and possibilities of
existence.
Earlier the consciousness of the soul was losing itself due to the
identification with many existing life forms, which were stronger than it is.
Every lower chakra was a point of 'decline' of consciousness of the soul
into lower forms, and the greater identification with the existence. Those
were all the ways of the divine consciousness to become aware of all the
potential of existence, of itself. When it is 'returned' to itself, its original
state in the seventh chakra , in samadhi , its full potential, then it will be
able to move through all the possibilities of existence, through all the other
chakras without losing the awareness of itself.
The entire process was this: for the divine consciousness of itself to be
present in its highest potential and purity and effective in all the potential
forms of existence, in all the states of being, without identification,
independent, through man, as the man's consciousness of the soul –
without the loss of its original potential.
This process was taking place in three steps.

Our experience of existence was in the beginning the oblivion of our true
nature, the consciousness of the soul, the sole experience of the Hertzian
frequency of the physical world, with all the restrictions of perception and
the power to act. It is this life known to all of us in this world. The first step
in the process of self-knowing was for the real nature of the physical world
to be known ( sat , the being, existence), that it is nothing all by itself and
unto itself but it is merely a reflection or projection of the universal field of
existence, the quantum field, akasha , by which the absolute divine
consciousness keeps manifesting itself. The first step consists of the mind
recognition, from the proper understanding of the nature of reality.
When this cognition matures to a sufficient degree so it is no longer
occasional but a permanent life reality, it then includes the entire being and
its actions, more precisely the awareness of the reality includes energy, too,
and actions in that reality. In the first step we only occasionally recognized
the reality of consciousness and existence, the reality of the divine
Absolute. It is called savikalpa samadhi – samadhi which is mixed with the
impressions of the manifested world.
When the consciousness of reality and energy with which we live in this
reality are joined, the second step occurs in which the objective, material
world disappears and the pure consciousness ( chit ) is uncovered as the
essence of the existence itself, and this consciousness is discovered as our
self-consciousness, as its essence (Self, atman ). In the first moments of
such cognition an awakened man is not able to participate in the physical
world because it is revealed as the dream for the awakened one. The
awakened one is unable to participate in dreams any longer. He is
independent of all the existence. All the states of consciousness, daylight
living, sleep, deep sleep without dreams, change before his eyes as though
he is the witness. He cannot be identified with any objects, but only with
the subject, with himself, with the pure consciousness that enables
everything, with the divine consciousness, he can never lose consciousness
of himself, to be something that he is not, because he always sees the
existence itself as a reflection of the divine consciousness.
Such experience Buddha expressed with words: 'it is not me, it is not mine'
- regarding the body, mind, ego, and all the states of consciousness. This

state is also expressed in the descriptions of the world as an illusion or
dream. The second step is practically speaking, the permanent realization of
transcendence, the nature of the very consciousness of the divine Absolute.
It is called nirvikalpa samadhi – samadhi without any illusions regarding
the manifested world.
This original authenticity and independence of the consciousness of any
identification with the being or existence, in the Patanjali's science of yoga
is called kaivalya . The word kaivalya marks the state of what is simple,
unmixed with anything, authentic, pure, and therefore contains the idea of
perfection and completion. All of this is based on the idea of separation,
surpassing, or transcendence. Perfection and authenticity of the man's
consciousness and essence are not possible without transcendence, without
the surpassing of the body and mind. It is manifested by the space between
the seventh chakra and the body, it is a little above the top of the head. This
space means that it cannot be reached with anything which comes from the
body and mind. Through no effort or process. It is only achieved by
surrender through self-awareness of all other states of consciousness (by
actualizing the other six chakras ).
The seventh chakra (or nirvikalpa samadhi ) is actualized in two ways only:
either by surrender or by self-cognition. Self-cognition is the path of
meditation and discipline of the mental stillness, the direct transcendence of
the mind. It is realized in the practice of the Buddhist meditation ( dhyana ,
vipassana , satipatthana , zazen , shikan taza ; on the details of the practice
of meditation see my book “ Sankhya” , the last chapter Kaivalya, and in
my book “Meditation - the first and last step” ). Meditation simply works
so that when our body and mind completely calm down, nothing can
happen but opening up of what is beyond the body and mind, the
consciousness of the higher mind, the consciousness of the soul, the
consciousness of the universal quantum field that enables everything and
that is everything, irrelevant of space and time.
When we stop blurring it, it manifests itself. The body and mind cannot be
quietened down by force but only through a very subtle realization that we
are neither our body nor are we our mind, by surpassing the identification
with the body and mind which is the basis of (metaphysical and any other)

ignorance. All the motion and phenomena of the body and mind falls under
the category of the Hertzian frequencies. Stillness has a non-Hertzian
frequency of the quantum field. That is the technique of meditation. There
must be no ideological or religious content (those would all be the traces of
the Hertzian frequencies of the mind) and such, objective and void of all
content are the Patanjali's and Buddhist meditation recommended here.
The experience of meditation manifests directly the unity of consciousness
and existence. When we quieten down the mind in meditation, we reach
consciousness which is beyond the mind and its contents, when we become
just a witness, we become the existence itself. In the pure, transcendental
consciousness of ourselves we do not differ from the sheer existence,
timeless presence, here and now.
Therefore, it is of crucial importance that meditation is tied to neither
metaphysical, ideological nor religious contents, and especially mental
contents of the personal nature, because it is in its essence the type of
practice in which the existence expresses itself directly as consciousness,
and consciousness as existence. Therefore, the real meditation is nothing
but cleansing and releasement of such contents; the mental hygiene.
Self-knowing is a direct path and it is suitable only to those mature souls
who are finalizing their cycle of incarnations, and that means that they are
not attached to the manifested world. Surrender is more accessable to those
who still take part in the experience of the world, but is for that reason
combined with the risks of mixing with the contents of the mind, which can
be very subtle, and then the whole affair turns into a pseudoreligious
performance and self-deception. Surrender in its essence means complete
understanding and acceptance that we are neither our body, nor our mind,
but the transcendental consciousness of the soul which surpasses and
enables, in accordance with knowledge and experience manifested here, of
the nature of the consciousness and existence. The same is experienced in
meditation. It means that self-knowing and surrender have the same final
act, they merge into one. Self-knowing cannot be realized without the
complete surrendering, nor can surrender be realized without the complete
self-knowing.

Surrender and final self-cognition can be understood only by understanding
the nature of the frequency of the first and the seventh chakra , using the
analogy of mirrors.
We have already stated that the nature of frequencies of the first and the
seventh chakra is opposite, the Hertzian and non-Hertzian. Those two
frequencies interact as mirrors, more precisely, as opposite or reverse image
of the reflected. Everything that appears to be in linear time and separate in
space in the rough reality of the three-dimension world (the first three
chakras ), is playing out gradually under the influence of the cause, and the
same thing applies for the non-Hertzian frequency of the universal quantum
field (seventh chakra ) where the timeless presence is already ever present
as realized, complete and perfect. The Hertzian mirror is nature in which all
the existence in linear space and time is played out. The divine
consciousness of our soul originates from the non-Hertzian universal
quantum field. It is only an illusory difference that exists due to the
difference in frequencies. This simulacrum is the essence of all the illusion
and ignorance in which man lives unless he has made an effort to actualize
all the chakras . It is the cause for all our incarnations and life dramas.
Awakening from that illusion, distracting the attention (of consciousness)
from the reverse state of affairs of the image in the mirror (existence), is the
purpose and goal of all our lives.
When consciousness and energy get together in ajna chakra , then they
have maximally come as close as possible to the non-Hertzian frequency
field where things become reverse. That is why then we are able to see with
ajna chakra or 'the third eye', the real nature of things, we see that
everything is timeless, we are able to be psychic only because everything is
already present in the non-Hertzian quantum field, there is no time during
the passing of which everything gets realized, they are already there, there
is not even the space as an idea of separation. Everything is already present
and achieved in the non-Hertzian quantum field, and for that reason a
psychic person can see all of this because he has contact with this field in
which everything already is. He can see only what the linear mind attached
to the body and the Hertzian frequencies of the lower chakra s is able to
transcend.

We can see reality only to the point we do not resist it – because in the
absolute sense it already is. Always when we imagine reality being
something other than it already is here and now, we resist it, and what we
keep resisting gains momentum against us, this phenomena of resisting
reality is the only shackle which perpetuates our illusion, ignorance and
suffering, and we add to its power . Therefore, the physical reality we do
not like, but are forced to live in, has been brought about nothing but our
resisting to accept the reality of our soul, the divine reality which always is
here and now and in everything. The ceasing of resisting to reality whatever
it may be, is the starting point of its creative change. The first and the last
step is always surrendering and acceptance. Basically, contrary to
everything that keeps our Hertzian mind trapped in the illusion of time and
the way it presents it to itself.
This experience in other systems of self-development was described as
seeing the Unity, everything within oneself and oneself in everything. All
other powers or siddhi are merely a manifestation of the non-Hertzian
frequency of consciousness in the field of the Hertzian existence, or the
quantum mind in the physical world.
One further point must be emphasized here: consciousness of the soul or the
quantum mind, the non-Hertzian frequencies can be manifested in the
physical world of the Hertzian frequencies, but the reverse is impossible.
Nothing that possesses Hertzian frequency, which appears to be separate in
time and space, cannot exist as such in the non-Hertzian reality of the
divine Absolute, in the consciousness of our soul. It can also be said that a
mirror can exist in the world, but the reverse reflection, the picture of the
world from the mirror can never be real in the world.
With this we have reached the final third step in the whole process of our
existence and awakening. It is the surpassing of all the differences of the
Hertzian and the non-Hertzian frequencies of the existence in unity. It is the
true unity of consciousness and existence. They together constitute reality,
the divine absolute reality, which is manifested through the prism of the
seven states of consciousness or chakras , and the purest is in the highest
one, the seventh chakra , in the purest consciousness a man can have of
himself. This consciousness is not of this world. An awakened individual

lives in this world as though he is not of this world, but he lives his life to
the fullest, with the maximum energy and awareness because he sees that
nothing is wrong or different than the most supreme divine reality.
In order to realize the consciousness of his soul while still in the body and
mind, he cannot be identified with the body or mind. He must first realize
the transcendence. The same is with the dreaming and awakening. He
cannot be in both at the same time. With the awakening of our soul all the
dreams of the manifested world disappear, dreams of the space and time in
which our divine existence was not the one that is. However, the real
knowing of illusion and its surpassing is in the knowing that as such it
never was real. For as long as we are getting rid of an illusion we give it
reality, which it itself never had.
All the previous states were some form of a reaction. Even nirvikalpa
samadhi was a reaction to the savikalpa samadhi , the same way that
savikalpa samadhi was a reaction to the state of ignorance and
unconsciousness of the mundane mind. This final third step is called sahaja
samadhi - the natural, permanent or infinite samadhi , which is not a
reaction to anything, which is outside all opposites, even the existence and
the non-existence, the consciousness and the unconsciousness.
This is the time to say that only our I was under the illusion, it does not
exist outside our I (ego). Our individual I is the only factor of every
illusion. Our I, our individual mind was the only factor which was making
the difference between the Hertzian and the non-Hertzian frequency, with
all the consequences to the world, or more accurately put, to the perception
of the world. Awakening of man is nothing but the surpassing of all the
limitations of the individual mind or its I (ego). With this all illusions are
overcome.
Only then we are complete in the consciousness of our soul, in the divine
consciousness which is everything, in the sahaja samadhi . The final sahaja
samadhi is the presence of the most supreme consciousness of our soul in
the physical body, which never happens naturally on its own accord, the
kind of consciousness of the soul which is so high and pure that it always
stays unembodied, above even the higher mind. It does not descend into the
body following a natural process, at the moment of the birth of the body,

but it is only able to descend into the body once the man has done
everything regarding his awareness and awakening, so that nothing else
remains. When he finished the karmic learning cycle, incarnation.
Completion the cycle of incarnations (the ceasing of rebirthing, ignorance
and suffering) is nothing but the complete cognition of the consciousness of
the pure soul which never incarnates. Expressions like 'enlightenment',
'knowing the God' or 'knowing oneself' (the self, Atman ) do not designate
anything other than the cognition of consciousness of one's soul which
existed before the birth in this body and will exist after this body, the
cognition of its absolute nature while we still are in this body in this world.
Always when we bitterly regretted after the dying of the body that we did
not awaken the immortal divine consciousness of our soul, which we
always are in our essence, and used that incarnation to live in the all-seeing
bliss, instead we were spellbound with the trivial contents of our physical
mind induced by the illusion of the individual separation, identification with
the physical body, and suffered as a result of that. We always kept
promising ourselves that next time we would live to express better the
consciousness of our soul, to remember ourselves, our true nature and in
that state the seeming greatest separation from the divine essence, which
life in this physical world represents, and that we would resist the alluring
attraction of the contents of the mind and always stay aware of the
consciousness itself and its source, the source of all existence. We were
always coming into this world with this motive in mind, and due to the
greatness of this undertaking, the greatness that shaped all the life on this
planet, it took many attempts for us to finally succeed in our mission. The
state of sahaja samadhi is the state of the soul that has achieved the goal.
The consciousness of our soul would not be what it is if anything else
existed but itself, something alien and non-authentic. Nothing else but itself
cannot exist, our individuality included. Therefore, its authentic state cannot
be a reaction to anything that would be non-authentic. The divine absolute
is the only reality. The entire process of our existence in our lives was
merely an attempt to recognize this reality in ourselves and in everything
else, as the existence itself. To know ourselves as the divine reality. We
were simply going from one life into another simply because we saw in the
only divine reality some difference, something other than itself – the

difference between 'this' and 'that' world, life and death, the awakened state
and dreaming, the right and the wrong. We saw it like that to have a motive
to experience everything. In the most supreme reality there is no difference
nor is there anything that is not it itself. In the language of the mind we say
that it is nothing, for this exact reason, we refer to nothing else, nothing it is
not. Everything within it is perfect, the way it is, because it is everything
that is happening.
Man in sahaja samadhi , in the full awareness of the consciousness of the
soul, lives completely aware of his past lives, the ones he had before this
physical birth, which is logical because the consciousness of the soul is a
witness to all of them. Getting to know one's previous lives means to get
acquainted with their meaning and value, they all happened so that we
would get to know the consciousness of our soul in all the possibilities of
existence. That is why this life is loved and revered the most, every moment
and in every respect, because it is the outcome of all the previous ones and
it is the reflection of the consciousness of the soul.
That is why for the man in sahaja samadhi nothing exists except the divine
reality, it has not the slightest idea that it was ever born. It is because now
he has the consciousness of the soul which was not born in the body, for
which the body is just a dream. The conviction that we were born is the
corner stone of every illusion, and of death also. It is impossible for him to
be identified with the body in any way because he always sees the
wholeness of the divine presence. He does not see his body as his own, he
sees it in the complete harmony with the earth, the sky and the entire
cosmos, with the entirety. He does not see himself as being born in the body
but in the physical universe. He sees clearly that his whole body is the
whole physical universe, which is in its basic, subatomic, quantum level,
completely interconnected into one unique being.
In the reality there is nothing separate in the whole physical world
therefore, no physical body is separate and different from the whole of the
universe. The body is merely a favourable place and a reference point from
which it can be involved in the drama of experiencing all the possibilities of
existence in the physical universe. Nothing else. That is why he sees clearly
that the consciousness of his soul has never been born in one body but in

the physical universe, and body is merely a good spot from which to gather
the experiences of existence, the reference point which moves through the
three-dimensional experience of existence – and the experience of existence
appears three-dimensional in the linear time only because it is observed
from one reference point, from the physical body. No other reason.
He is independent of any form of existence. That is why he has a
completely objective awareness of every form of existence.
To him, life and death are equally illusory. From life to life goes the one
who sees this difference and gives importance to the former at the expense
of the latter.
He lives in the present moment as though it is the last in this world, as
though he was already dead, but for that exact reason every moment is the
fullest ecstasy of life. The full potential of life of every moment can be
experienced only from the perspective that surpasses life.
He does not display that he is more aware than other people, because in all
people, even their unconsciousness he sees the impact of the consciousness
of the divine Absolute. Nothing exists for him that is not the divine
consciousness, the dreams, illusions and stupidity are all the expressions of
the divine consciousness as the most supreme wisdom. It is because he does
not distinguish the divine consciousness from the existence itself.
He does not see important difference between sleeping and functioning in
everyday activities, still he finds his way perfectly both in sleep and in
awakened functioning, and apparently much better than all those who are
identified with the contents of their dreams in sleep and during the day.
Nothing exists that is wrong for him, because nothing can be outside the
divine Absolute, yet he always acts, speaks and thinks properly because the
divine consciousness is never different from himself. For him it is
impossible to be incorrect.
To him everything is equally real, because he is independent of everything.
He knows that a man's greatest value begins where individuality stops. He
never seeks safety in the body because he knows the body is just a

consequence of a higher cause and far bigger power, the consciousness of
the soul. He has sanctuary in the cause of all things. [13] He does not possess
his I (ego) because he is not separate from the divine consciousness that is
everything, nonetheless, he acts as a perfect, complete person which is the
personification of the presence of the perfect and complete divine
consciousness. Within himself he is always the same although he enjoys
any outer change or difference. He can do so only because he has within
him the consciousness of the supreme soul which is above birth and the
existence itself. He lives inconspicuously among people as a worker, poet,
rich man or a beggar, people do not notice him for the same reason they do
not notice the permanent presence of the consciousness of the divine
Absolute in everything every moment of every day. For the same reason he
has no need to disclose himself to anyone. He cannot take part in their
dreams. In order for people to recognize him, they must first recognize the
consciousness of the divine Absolute in themselves first.
These are to name but a few traits of the full potential of the unborn
consciousness of the soul once it finds itself in the body, which is called
sahaja samadhi .
These three steps are in Shankara's advaita vedanta described with the
expression sat-cit-ananda . Sat is being or existence, cit is the pure
transcendental consciousness, ananda is the most supreme bliss which is
found in us once we become aware of their unity.
There is no existence ( sat ) without consciousness ( cit ). Consciousness is
manifested as the overall existence, as everything that is. Recognizing the
unity of consciousness and existence only happens in man completely as the
heavenly bliss, ananda (‘kingdom come’), a timeless and ever present
unconditional divine love, both in man and in everything that exists and in
everything that takes place. If it were not already in everything, as the true
nature of everything, a man could not experience it.
When people become aware of their true origin, what enables their
existence, they will create heaven on earth. It is the simplest definition of
uniting consciousness and existence.

Man is merely a conscious subject where the unity of consciousness and
existence takes place. Only once they join perfectly in man and recognize
one another in unity, their unity through man is expressed as the
unconditional divine love. The divine Absolute itself expresses its
unconditional love through man.
The entire life and nature were designed to make this happen.
◆◆◆
Thank you for reading the “Samadhi: Unity of Consciousness and
Existence”. Gaining exposure as an independent author relies mostly on
word-of-mouth, so if you have the time and inclination, please consider
leaving a short review wherever you can.
◆◆◆
You can find answers on common readers questions on my blog.
IvanAntic.com/blog/
